---
title: "Does EA Sports dictate the FIFPro Team of the Year?"
author: James Ritchie
---

The EA Sports FIFA franchise is without doubt one of the most powerful video game enterprises in the modern era.  Every year EA as a company generates a mouth-watering revenue of $3.797 billion, the equivalent of 94,925,000 copies of FIFA 15.  Every year it is played by millions of followers on every continent and without doubt its most popular selling point is FIFA Ultimate Team.

FIFA Ultimate Team first came into existence all the way back in 2009 and EA Sports has not looked back since.  Ultimate Team in itself has created a vibrant economy of buyers and sellers with hundreds of major coin selling sites now available on the internet.  It is thus understandable that EA would have a vested interest in maintaining the game’s popularity as each year its novelty begins to fade away and people begin to realize it is just the exact same game but something else is overpowered and players have been moved to their new clubs and you’re spending yet another 40 quid on something you don’t even have time to play due to all your homework and your mother’s insistence on vacuuming right next to you whenever you get on and asking sarcastically if ‘professional FIFA player’ will be going down on your UCAS form and… But I digress.

The point still stands that the gamers want to use the best, sweatiest, most over-powered monsters that EA can provide them with, and here is where EA meets a dilemma.  With the exception of Ronaldo, Messi and a select few others most of the “good” players are stunningly mediocre.  Why pick 86 rated Hummels when 74 rated Zouma does his job just as well, if not better.  However, rather unsurprisingly, these cheap but ridiculously “good” bad players (stay with me here) never get in-forms or anything else special because quite frankly they’re not good - they’re bad.

And so, every year the Ballon d’Or rolls around and with it the FIFPro Team of the Year selection.  Year after year ridiculous decisions are made on who should be a part of the FIFA Team of the Year which enrages football fans globally but not enough for them to remember their anger when the awards ceremony comes by again the next year and the process begins again.

When looking back through the history books, all the Team of the Years seem justified until just after the crucial turning point, the introduction of FIFA Ultimate Team in FIFA ‘09.  2010 - Lucio (Internazionale); 2011 - Dani Alves; 2012 -Dani Alves; 2013 - Dani Alves/Xavi; 2014 - David Luiz/Andres Iniesta.  A common occurrence among these players are quick, skilfull defenders who are simply unstoppable machines.  these are players which, although we disagree with their presence in the FIFPro team of the Year, we are absolutely desperate to own in our teams.  The aftermath of the Team of the Year is in fact so severe that there is a complete crash in the FIFA Ultimate Team market as it is flooded with coins bought online.

To conclude, we have a multi-billion dollar company, the most popular sport in the world, a monopoly over the rights to FIFA, a massive awards ceremony and some salivating billionaires.  You can argue that this is a ridiculous conspiracy based on wild claims and completely without substance but for me the evidence is plain to see.  EA Sports more or less controls the FIFPro Team of the Year and we’d better prepare to start to see some more than dubious decisions being made in the years to come.
