---
title: "Moby Dick - A Literary Debate"
author: "Paul Norris, Ms Candelaria and Mr Hager"
---

Moby Dick - A Literary Debate

My first encounter with Moby Dick occurred at the age of six when I saw a 1962 animated version. My only memory of it is a dark sky looming above an  ocean, with a man tied to a white whale floating above the turbulent waves; it was, needless to say, utterly terrifying. I have learnt since that this was a Tom and Jerry cartoon.
Has the image of the white whale haunted me throughout my life, representing the ultimate hollowness of all my desires and the fleeting nature of the principles I hold dear? No. But perhaps it should have. Head of English Mr Hager and Colet Fellow Ms Candelaria engage in a dispute of leviathanic proportions...


### Ms Candelaria - An Attack on ‘The Book’

I was asked to read Moby-Dick for the first time two years ago, when I was a twenty-year-old undergraduate studying literature. I approached Melville’s chef-d’oeuvre skeptically. I scribbled the word “melodramatic” in the margins next to the line: “Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever it is damp, drizzly November in my soul…” I couldn’t get over the cliché of using the weather to represent sadness, or how lazy and aggrandizing it seemed to write about the “soul”. Somewhere in that sentence was a nuance that Melville was refusing to explore adequately. He was scratching the surface of some profound revelation, but he wasn’t using language to probe deeply enough to get there.

Each time I tried to read Moby-Dick, I was haunted by the novel’s imprecision. Starting off the chapter called “Loomings”, Ishmael, the novel’s narrator, shares with readers that he decided to go to sea some years ago, “never mind how many precisely.” There is little regard for the fact that the story is in the details. This lack of clarity is also found in the prose. The whale is described as a “monster”, a “leviathan”, and a “fish” at different points in the narration, even though whales, unlike fish, are warm-blooded, lunged creatures. In Moby-Dick, language is inexact, and as a result, it becomes unreliable.

Because my GPA depended on it, because I had a lengthy essay to write, because my professor wasn’t impressed with my selective reading habits and selective contributions, I spent three weeks trying, but failing, to make my way through Moby-Dick. In a desperate attempt to keep myself engaged, I created a Word document with all the lines from Moby-Dick that struck me as funny or interesting. I tried to think of a Moby-Dick as a dining hall friend: full of anecdotes, lacking in insight. I selected quotations and labeled them for myself. What to do when you drop food on the floor but still want to eat it: “I took it up, and held it close to the light, and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way possible to arrive at some satisfactory conclusion concerning it”, the trouble with being cold-called in lectures: “But the interval I spent in deliberating what to say, was a fatal one,” and practical advice: “But I don’t fancy having a man smoking in bed with me. It’s dangerous. Besides, I ain’t insured.”

I tried to make the novel relevant to my world, which seemed to be a way of loving it, but my efforts were in vain. Two years later, I am still stuck in the middle of Moby-Dick, unable to remove my bookmark, but also unable to pick up where I left off because I cannot summon the willpower required to continue reading; there is no part of me that feels compelled to make my way to the end of the book. Stubborn reader that I am, I don’t blame myself; I blame the novel for failing to catch my attention, for failing to intrigue and excite me the way a good story should. I blame Melville for his encyclopedic chapters on whales, and for his imprecision, which stems from a lack of faith in language.

Perhaps what I struggle with, in equal measure, is that Melville forces me to grapple with flaws I recognize in myself. Disenchanted with all there is to see on land, Ishmael ignores Elijah’s ominous prophecy, the foreboding weather, and the unwelcoming appearances of the men on the Pequod as he decides to go to sea because “[he] want[s] to see what whaling is. [He] want[s] to see the world.” I have felt the same disenchantment, the same unidentifiable malaise, the same impulse to leave New York for London, hopeful that the adventure would help me to escape all that has been tumultuous about my early twenties. I hoped that Melville would find the words to describe the chaos of emerging adulthood; I held him to this standard, even though the precise phrases also elude me, because as a reader, I believe that fiction should be a sad, funny and enlightening mess of a thing.

I cling to the idea that fiction should teach me lessons about the world that I am too daft to understand without a guide.  I regret that Melville failed to find the words that I have so often failed to find for myself. Maybe it is because my expectations are too high that I find Moby-Dick falls short.


### Mr Hager - A Defence of ‘The Book’

‘Metaphors?  I hate metaphors.  That’s why my favourite book is Moby-Dick.  No frou-frou symbolism, just a good simple tale about a man who hates an animal.’  So speaks Parks and Recreation’s hypermasculine Ron Swanson in a joke which credits its audience with understanding its irony, even if Swanson himself is entirely serious.  Swanson is so manly that in early episodes of the TV show he has a poster of a fried breakfast tacked onto his office wall, and while his interpretation of the novel is comically appealing in its rampant anti-intellectualism, Melville didn’t write for readers whose vision of the world was reductive.

Nor did he ultimately write for those who want a good story, although it seems that the novel did actually start out as Ron Swanson’s dream book.  Having written nautical novels before, Melville drew on his last untapped experience - in a whaling vessel - and produced something with which he was dissatisfied, writing to a friend that “blubber is blubber...Though you may get oil out of it, the poetry runs as hard as sap from a frozen maple tree.”  Some readers still feel this way, citing the supposedly interminable sections about the whaling industry and whales themselves, or the simplicity of the plot (famously simplified by Hollywood in the tag-line ‘The Man, The Whale, The Vengeance’) as reasons to lament its revered status amongst writers and critics.  Such is its importance that, for example, Chad Harbach’s recent novel The Art of Fielding refers to Moby-Dick simply as ‘The Book’.

Melville spent nearly a year revising his already finished, tedious, whaling narrative.  In doing so he broke it, but that was the point.  He smashed its confines and expanded outwards, introducing the monomaniacal Ahab and, crucially, turning the White Whale into a symbol of everything and nothing, of the forces of chaos that threaten humanity and the terrifying blankness which threatens our fragile existence.

Charles Olson, the poet, wrote the definitive critical study of Moby-Dick in which he celebrates “a Melville who was long-eyed enough to understand the Pacific as part of our geography, another West, prefigured in the plains, antithetical.”  The sea is the logical, and commercial, extension of American 19th Century expansionism but it is also, for Melville, “the dark side of this earth, and [that] which is two thirds of this earth”.  Man can only sail on top of it, and it therefore becomes a symbol of the limitations of human knowledge and power, as well as something more metaphysically troubling.  If the sea is the plain that man tries, and fails to tame, then the White Whale is the symbol of the chaotic force that must be conquered and purged, but which can also never be fully understood.  Ahab’s quest is a cleansing one, and doomed, and the implications of this cause Olson to argue that the novel “is America, all of her space, the malice, the root.”

It has been called imprecise, but those who argue for precision have a faith in language and human thought which Melville calls into question.  The novel is obsessed with precision, hence the obsession with the details of whaling, and the classification of whales (which Melville believed to be fish, not mammals), but it is profoundly skeptical of the confident man who believes that he has the tools to pin down the universe.  Melville’s whale is both flesh and myth, a contingent creature and a ubiquitous force; it is a creature to be hunted and what critics have called ‘the unharpoonable signifier’.  The Pequod, the whaling vessel, is both a ship and a microcosm of America.  Ahab is both the vengeful captain and the symbol of capitalist man who has specialised to the point of monomania.  Moby-Dick contains multitudes.  It is so large that Melville abandons his narrative voice (Ishmael) since one human being cannot frame the scope of his novel.  Olson argues that “the thing got away from him.  It does, from us.”  Melville couldn’t quite contain his subject matter, but one can hardly blame him given that he took on the physical and metaphysical realm all at once.

Melville’s narrator tells the reader that “To produce a mighty book, you must choose a mighty theme.”  Melville’s theme is as large as they come.  It is not for everyone, but who wants to read a novel that is?  Perhaps Ron Swanson does.  Later in the same episode of Parks and Recreation he offers the following assessment of Moby-Dick: ‘Does the white whale actually symbolise the unknowability and meaninglessness of human existence?  No; it’s just a ******* fish’.  It is a great line, but the world would be much poorer if he were right.
