---
title: Obsessed
author: Jamie Lucas
---

‘Relationship between Eva Mendes and Ryan Gosling crumbles’. I mean, who cares? We do.

The front page of The Sun reads ‘Godzilla kills Bono’. Nonetheless, it is the UK’s most widely read newspaper, pulling in a weekly readership of 13.5 million people and ranking a substantial 1.5 million readers ahead of the next most read paper, The Daily Mail.

As a nation, celebrities and pop culture obsess us. We can’t get enough of who is dating whom and that ‘Cheryl is heading back to Ashley again’. However, what exactly is the reason for this and why do we, as Brits, invest so much of our tea-drinking relaxation time to reading such rubbish?

One answer must lie in this fairly gigantic question: ‘why do we read anything?’ The answer is simple: escapism. This (for those who don’t do ‘englishy’ terms) is the tendency to seek distraction and relief from the unpleasant realities of life, namely in the form of entertainment. Though this explanation could be used for any form of recreation, it applies especially to this topic. What better way to get away from the harsh realities of the devastating acts of violence in Syria, than by opening up a magazine and reading about the latest ludicrous stunt Miley Cyrus has pulled to attract the world’s media and prove that she is still alive. It helps us carry on in life, happy in the knowledge that Katy Perry rode into the Super bowl on an enormous lion. Yet, we stay blissfully unaware of the many thousands of soldiers riding into war zones in tanks to protect us. Actually, maybe this would be  mentioned reluctantly on Page 12, who knows?

In addition, not only does it stop us thinking about anything too ‘real’, it gives us something to talk about. Gossip. As a nation, we love to gossip. Who can blame us? I mean, did you hear that so and so was about to get married to so and so but then just before the vows, so and so made a run for it? No! Don’t worry, all the paparazzi were there to faithfully capture every single tear and shocked face, and then smother it on the front page to keep us enriched and enlightened so we can tell Louise when we next see her down at the salon. Thank God. In a recent survey by the ‘Social Issues Research Centre’ of 800 people under 30, up to a staggering 67% of conversation was found to be gossip. Though this may not be a new phenomenon, and has been proven to be a vital part of social interactions and wellbeing, the power these publications have over people’s lives is terrifying, quite frankly. This leads onto the next question: ‘is this obsession dangerous?’

‘65-lb weight gain – Kim’s pregnancy nightmare’. Okay, so we all know of the Kardashians, that ‘multi-talented’, famous-because-they-are-famous family. Well, a recent celebrity scandal seems to have been that Kim (one of the daughters) put on weight when she became pregnant. WHAT? I hear you gasp. A woman putting on weight because another human is growing inside of her? Quite frankly, it’s horrifying (if you didn’t get it, yes, that was sarcasm). However, this absurd media phenomenon does bring to light much more serious issues. Body dysmorphia, affecting around 1 in 100 people in the UK, is a big issue. Not only this but anorexia, depression, bulimia and even suicide stem from this image-driven society, putting pressure on both males and females to look like the photoshopped pictures of perfection plastered on the front page of glossy magazines. However, these are all quite widely talked about problems; one factor less considered includes the impact this ‘culture’ could be having on younger people. An appalling 85% of 11-14 year olds said they would prefer to read gossip magazines to a novel by well-known children's authors Philip Pullman or Jacqueline Wilson. Not only does this breed a generation of mind-numb children, obsessed with what they look like, it stops them widening their imaginations and supplementing their development. In addition, when people read sensationalist headlines, they become desensitised to real life events, which, if actually experienced, would no longer shock them. An 11-year old thinking it is completely natural to look like an orange skeleton that has been divorced five times and is 80% plastic? It’s not healthy. Unfortunately, these are only some of the issues raised by this vacuous obsession and many more exist; the list is too long to mention them all.

Therefore, to conclude, obsession is dangerous. It would be considered so if it were anything else, yet because many accept this one as ‘normal’, it has become a part of British culture. Therefore, next time you see the headline: ‘Body Panic! – 21 shocking bodies inside’, just think: ‘am I obsessed?’
