---
title: "No, Criticising Israel is not the new form of anti-Semitism"
author: Harry Snider
---

*This article is in response to ‘The new anti-Semitism?’ by Jake O’Keefe and Theo Anton, which our readers can access by viewing the December 2014 Black and White Issue.*

Let me preface this article by saying that in no way is anti-Semitism, or any form of prejudice and discrimination, acceptable and there is no place in this world for such hatred. However, let me also preface this article by saying that criticising Israel may put you into the same bracket as anti-Semites. Of course, there are anti-Semites in the dark corners of the internet that claim there is a “Zionist plot”. This is, after all, the internet. But it takes only a few minutes to find similar comments made by Islamophobes condemning a whole religion based on the actions of a small, radical minority. Now, in no way am I providing these other comments to justify those comments made about the Jewish people, but what I am trying to show is that comments on the internet cannot be taken seriously. You cannot equate criticism of Israel, on any level, to anti-Semitism just because some sad keyboard warrior has voiced a similar opinion. Unfortunately, it is possible to share an opinion with a racist, but that doesn't make you inherently racist. By sharing the view that Israel has committed war crimes against the Arabs of Palestine does not mean you share the view that there is a “Zionist plot”.

Israel may have withdrawn from Gaza nine years ago, but that hasn't stopped the rapid construction of settlement on contested lands. It is a process that the UN has deemed illegal, yet Israel continues to demolish existing Palestinian settlements to make way for the new Israeli ones. Israel is actively demolishing Palestinian settlements in order to move Israelis into land that does not belong to them. This is most prominent along the West Bank and in East Jerusalem where about 500,000 Israelis have settled among 2.4 million Palestinians. This further strains relations between the Israelis and the Palestinians who live there as both see each other as a threat. As the British ambassador to Israel told us in Polecon a few weeks back, many of the Israelis who move into these new settlements, especially those who are in the settlements furthest from Jerusalem, are some of the most hardline activists who will not accept a conversation about legitimacy. A recent Vice News documentary on this housing crisis highlighted this issue. They interviewed many Israelis moving into the Silwan neighbourhood, many of whom recently moved from the US. They view Palestinians living there as a direct challenge on their God given right. They view Israel, and more specifically Jerusalem, as the Holy Land and therefore it is their land. Even though the Palestinians have been living there longer, this is still a contested area. Meanwhile, Palestinians claim, with some conviction and justification, that the Israeli developments are illegal. Both Israelis and Palestinians have started conflicts over this, sometimes escalating into kidnapping and murder, crimes both parties are guilty of. My point here is that Israel is committing something that is wholly illegal, hence why there have been so many UN resolutions against it. 40% of all UN resolutions were targeted at Israel: not because the UN is anti-Semitic, but because Israel is committing illegal acts. It is true that there have been a disproportionate amount of resolutions against Israel in comparison to countries such as North Korea or Syria, but this is because Israel is not considered a dictatorship. Israel is the strongest ally of the US in the Middle East, which is why there have been so many resolutions. Not once have they never threatened the security of Western countries, like North Korea and Russia have. They are not a threat to the Western world, meaning it is reasonable to assume that they would take these resolutions into account and change their ways. But they haven’t. They continue to commit atrocities ranging from the demolition of legitimate Palestinian settlements, to the police brutality that targets Palestinians.

One argument suggests that Israelis equate criticism of Israel with anti-Semitism in a deliberate attempt to prevent legitimate criticism of Israel and discredit critics. This can be seen in Norman Finkelstein's book “Beyond Chutzpah: On the Misuse of Anti-Semitism and the Abuse of History”, in that some supporters of Israel employ accusations of anti-Semitism to attack critics of Israel, with the goal of discrediting the critics and silencing the criticism. This is because they understand that what they are doing is wrong but they see no harm in it. They view the West Bank as part of the Holy Land and the Holy Land as theirs. Therefore, in a sense, the ends justify the means. Many Jews also view that the misuse of the accusation of anti-Semitism can be dangerous as it detracts from the seriousness of the issue. Other Jews also feel an obligation to accuse critics of anti-Semitism. Jon Stewart, for instance, the famous left wing TV show host and a Jew himself, claims to have received thousands of complaints and even death threats after showing sympathy to Palestine on The Daily Show. This highlights how many Jews feel an obligation as their own might turn on them.

What I am trying to say is that there is deserved criticism of Israel and there needs to be a constructive conversation about it. Israel is a democratic state and there are views on both sides that need to be shared. But the constant accusation of anti-Semitism is not conducive to peace and change. This needs to change, so stop the accusations and start the conversations on the war crimes and legitimacy of Israel’s actions.
