---
title: "Some Thoughts on Religion and Sexist Double Standards"
author: Michael Sackur
---

Remember that scene in *Annie Hall* where Annie and Alvy Singer go on their first date, and they’re sitting on a bench in Central Park, and they surreptitiously spy on all those people and take wild, jokey guesses as to who they are and what they might be like? “Look, look at that guy! He’s the latest! Just came back from the gin-rummy farm last night. He placed third!” That one. Got it? Okay. Now I want to play a similar game. But in my version, instead of extrapolating information about people on the basis of their appearances, our judgements are going to be made on the basis of stuff they have said or written. First up: let’s all take a wild stab in the dark as to what sort of bloke might open an article – published in 2009 and contemplate the prospect of the deputy leader of the Labour Party succeeding Gordon Brown – with these words: “So — Harriet Harman, then. Would you? I mean after a few beers obviously, not while you were sober.” Now, you might disagree with me on this one, but the overriding impression I am getting of the person who wrote the above – and this is going to sound strange so bear with me – is that he is, ooh I dunno, a bit sexist. Particularly if said person went on to lambast Mrs. Harman not only for her unattractiveness, but also for her belief in a “vacuous feminism” deriving from her “reflex loathing of men”. It would be my conviction also that, despite this person’s subsequent attempts to claim his comments were “satirical”, they are probably still revealing about his underlying attitudes towards women. But that’s just my take on it.

Why do I bring this up? Well, as it happens, the particular character responsible for this piece of anti-Harman “satire”, a man who goes by the name of Rod Liddle, has decided he has some issues with Islam, too. “I’m not terribly keen on Islam”, he admitted in a Channel Four News debate. “It seems to lend itself to a certain homophobia…and I don’t agree with its views towards women…I wish there were a lot more Muslim feminists.” Oh really? So let me just see if I’ve got this straight: in Mr. Liddle’s world, the terrible absence of Muslim women – let’s just conveniently forget for a minute about Irshad Manji, Ayaan Hirsi Ali and Zeba Khan, among others - who are willing to self-empower and take on the patriarchal assumptions of their faith is a crying shame. But when western, non-Muslim women identify as feminists, that’s really just a cloak for their empty-headed, man-hating bigotry. What we have here is a classic example of a very modern right-wing malady: the white, male, conservative journalist who will spend copious amounts of time penning articles perpetuating the kind of lazy gender stereotypes which are harmful both to women and to the LGBT community, and who will criticise those who challenge them, but also conveniently jumps on the feminist bandwagon whenever it comes to attacking Muslims. From the EDL to Geert Wilders, from Richard Littlejohn to Mark Steyn, time and time again people who purport to be deeply concerned by the status of women in the Islamic faith turn out mysteriously to be just fine with their treatment under Christianity and Judaism, and indeed call for the returned “cultural dominance” of those religions as a means to prevent Islam’s spread. Even Richard Dawkins, once a powerful voice of the humanist movement, has been at it recently. In a sarcastic letter to an imagined Muslim woman living in a repressive Islamic state, Dawkins adopted the voice of a Western feminist to write: “Stop whining will you. Yes, yes, I know you had your genitals mutilated with a razor blade, and…yawn…don’t tell me again, I know you aren’t allowed to drive a car, and can’t leave the house without a male relative, and your husband is allowed to beat you, and you’ll be stoned to death if you commit adultery. But stop whining, will you. Think of the suffering your poor American sisters have to put up with.” In other words, women in the West have no right to complain about the sexism they experience on a daily basis, for the simple reason that they don’t live in the Middle East, where the women there have it worse.

To remain utterly silent about sexism and oppression, or worse still, to promote it; until it comes to the debate about Islam, at which point it transforms into a handy stick with which to bash Muslims, is deplorable. But what I find even more egregious is the suggestion made by some that, in order to tackle widespread anti-women attitudes inspired by the misogyny undeniably evident throughout the Quran, governments must respond with “a foil”: one which takes the form of the aggressive promotion of “Christian values” in the public sphere. This is absurd for two reasons. First, there is absolutely no cause to consider Islam as any worse, in its teachings on gender or on any other matter, than the other Abrahamic religions; let us not forget the claims of the Book of Genesis that women were brought into existence specifically for the purpose of serving men, that their pain in childbirth is a punishment and that they must always remain subservient to their husbands. It is a source of continued bafflement to me that people like Melanie Phillips and Niall Ferguson, both of whom characterize themselves as non-believers, claim to view Christianity as the chief facilitator of “the transmission…of ethical values between generations” and as the source of “the bedrock values of Western civilization” respectively, whilst paying no heed to the fact that, in the words of writer Kenan Malick: “Perhaps the most original and profound contribution of Christianity to the ‘Western’ tradition is also its most pernicious: the doctrine of Original Sin…in the Christian tradition it is impossible for humans to do good on their own account, because the Fall has degraded both their moral capacity and their willpower.” Malick points out that, whilst in the Jewish and Islamic tradition, Adam and Eve’s transgression creates a sin against their own souls but does not condemn humanity, it is in Christianity’s transformation of the story’s meaning that it “has perhaps secured its greatest influence, a bleak description of human nature that came to dominate Western ethical thinking…Not till the Enlightenment was the bleakness of that vision of human nature truly challenged.”

And all this hand-wringing about how the decline of Christianity is robbing us of the “spiritual weaponry” needed to fight Islamism is distasteful for a second reason: from so very much of it there rises the pungent whiff of hypocrisy. It is telling that pretty much all of the politicians and commentators who subscribe to this moral panic line of thinking actually call themselves atheists. “I’m an incurable atheist” proclaims Niall Ferguson, for example, in spite of his aforementioned rant about the necessity for Christian ethics. And will you just listen to this: “I saw as a child that, having tried as hard as I could, I could not believe in God…despite extensive reflection, I can see no reason after all these years to revise my view.” That was Simon Heffer, a man who has written that Christianity is essential for providing “the moral fabric” both for the foundation of society and for public policy. This kind of belief, the “I-don’t-believe-in-Christainity-but-nevertheless-think-it-should-be-promoted-because-it’s-good-for-people” viewpoint, is extraordinarily patronising. If you expressly identify yourself using the term “atheist”, that requires your conviction that there is no God to be very strong, as strong as your conviction that fairies do not exist. If you do genuinely have the degree of certainty implied by the word “atheist”, it is clearly not consistent of you to claim that it is “good for society” for people to be religious; it palpably is not good for society if in that society there is widespread belief in stuff which is untrue. So please. I don’t ask for much. I just demand that if we condemn misogyny in Islam, which by all means we should, we be consistent and condemn it everywhere else we see it, too. Also, I ask that, if we are going to call ourselves atheists, which by all means we should, can we please stop insulting the intelligence of others by telling them that even though their belief system is predicated on falsehoods, they should go on subscribing to it simply because such belief is good for them? That’s not really too much to ask, is it?
