---
title: The Slippery Slope To Grexit
author: Adam Thompson
---

When, on the 29th of December last year, the ruling Conservative Greek coalition failed to generate enough votes for their presidential candidate, snap elections were called. The polls only ever predicted one winner. The radical left-wing Syriza party won a remarkable 149 seats, out of the 300 available. Needing just two more seats for a working majority, it quickly made a deal with the right-wing Independent Greeks. These two new coalition partners’ views differ on every aspect bar one, the solution to Greece’s enormous debt.
Standing at €320bn, around 174% of Greece's economic output, the Greek debt continues to dominate domestic politics, as much as that of Europe as a whole. Syriza’s position is clear and concise: no more austerity! This leaves them to clearly reject the European Union’s bailout terms, which require a certain degree of cuts to be made, along with modest job losses in the public sector. These were begun by the previous government, who slowly made progress towards balancing the books. Now Syriza says that it’s going to reverse all of these changes made, whilst also giving the public an assortment of extra hand-outs, designed to appease the angry voters who elected them into government. At the same time, they argue that Greece can simply not afford to repay these massive debts, without crippling its economy. Thus, their solution is that the deficit be halved, with the remaining repayments linked to the performance of the Greek economy. So, how should European governments, who effectively own over 60% of the Greek debt, respond?
Firstly, it’s necessary to acknowledge that Syriza is right, insofar as Greece can simply not afford to repay their oversized debts. It is also essential, when dishing out blame, to acknowledge that the EU watched previous Greek governments tamper with government accounts and borrow far more than they could afford to repay, without taking any action, all as part of the great European project. Yet it’s also necessary to understand why Greek is running such a large current account deficit in the first place. Tax collecting, for a start, is inefficient: multiple whistle-blowers have alleged that a culture of intimidation exists against tax officials, who are actively encouraged to take bribes from both people and organisations. The second major issue, is the inefficiency of the state sector. Job security regulation surrounding public sector workers means that it is almost impossible to fire people regardless of their performance. This leads to many cases of poor attendance. For example, overpaid train operators don’t feel the need to arrive for work on a consistent basis as there is little action that can be taken against them. In fact, statisticians have concluded, that it would theoretically be cheaper and more reliable, for the government to close the train network and fund the taxi journey for every train user in the country than to continue operating the railway in its current form!
Further complicating the situation, is that many European nations (ranging from Spain to Italy to France) with sizeable debts of their own, have growing populist movements whose support is based on their radical anti-austerity stance. If the EU acts leniently towards Greece’s debt, which it could easily afford to waive if it felt so obliged, then many voters in these nations would take it as a signal that they too could do away with austerity. Thus, the EU should strike a middle balance, whilst accepting some portion of the blame. Greece should be forced to pay the debt in full, but its deadlines should be extended around 50 years into the future, with yearly interest only equal to the inflation of the Euro. More loans at low interest rates should also be made available, as long as certain conditions are met. Foremost, Greece must reform its tax collection system, with outside help if required. Equally important, is that it makes cuts to the public sector, reforming its job security and reducing wages. Outside monitors would be needed, and although highly likely to be resented by people at first, these changes would clean up Greek finances; with reform to laws regarding job security particularly relevant to the ailing private sector. In an ideal scenario, Greece would accept these conditions, understanding that they would be beneficial in the long term. However, in reality it seems unlikely that Syriza will accept, leaving the EU with no other choice but to expel Greece from the Euro, with disastrous consequences for all Greeks involved and potential repercussions throughout the Eurozone and beyond.
