---
title: The Problem of Inequality
author: James Cole
---

The world is now richer than it has ever been before – a fact which hardly seems surprising when considering the likes of the technological billionaires across the Atlantic or the oil tycoons of the Middle East. Not only is there more money floating about, but the global economy has doubled in the past 20 years, a rate of growth never witnessed before in human history.  
Yet, whilst the oligarchs munch on their Caviar, it may come as a shock that not everyone is benefiting from this newfound prosperity. A study published by Oxfam this year uncovered that the richest 1% of the global population owned a phenomenal 48% of its wealth. Although the richest 1% sounds in the league of multi-billionaires, what may prove most surprising to you is that to qualify for this sector of society means possessing  wealth of just half a million pounds – a bracket which encompasses most London property owners and the vast majority of Paulines. Whilst life may seem flush as daddy brings home his next big bonus, conditions for the less well off have been declining fast. Over the past four years, the poorest 50% of the world’s population have witnessed a drop in wealth of over $750 billion. As the gap between the rich and poor grows ever wider, the problem of inequality has become a pressing concern for governments across the globe.

And from a policy maker’s point of view, it’s a problem that desperately needs to be addressed. Countless studies have presented the strong correlation between high inequality and higher poverty, low life expectancy, low child wellbeing, high rates of smoking and alcoholism – the list could go on. Aside from the clear social implications, the cost to the government of high inequality is worryingly high. The links between low social status and mental illness in very unequal societies are just starting to become apparent. Usually starting with cases of bullying at school, people on the more unequal end of the spectrum are feeling the impact of a loss of social status, leaving them demoralised and unwilling to work. Not only is this costly in terms of healthcare bills, but it also results in an effect known as hysteresis where mentally depressed workers lose skills and the economic output of the country weakens.

But for many, the problem of inequality has been challenging to address. Given the American Dream ideology that working hard earns you success and prosperity, the redistribution from the wealthy to the poor may appear difficult to justify. If you come from a family that has slogged away for generations to secure the privileges that you enjoy today it seems unfair for these to be taken away and given to those who have not been so lucky for the purpose of creating a fairer society.

Yet here’s a fact that may cause you to shift your viewpoint a little: inequality is hurting the rich too. This can be seen both on an individual level and as an effect on the economy as a whole. As inequality puts more pressure on people to prove their material worth, people in unequal societies feel obliged to spend more money on flashy cars and designer clothes in order to demonstrate their rank in society. This forces richer people to spend more and more hours behind their desks and risk running into even greater debt. As inequality continually pushes back the fight against poverty, this will inevitably put a buffer on economic growth and mean that there is less wealth for the rich to benefit from in the future.

Inequality is clearly a significant problem. And it’s one that is impossible to hide under the carpet. But how can we begin to tackle it? It would appear that throwing money at the problem would be the easiest solution, but this has resulted in little resolution and met with opposition – not least from the NGOs themselves. Oxfam’s own International executive Winnie Bynayima admitted in an article for the Independent that charity simply isn’t the answer. Even though the solution might not lie directly in the pockets of the rich, this is not to say that wealthier members of society do not hold the key to even out the situation. By readjusting taxes for big businesses, this will increase production costs and put a cap on ludicrous city salaries.  The money raised can then be reinvested in education and training to create a skilled workforce for the future.  

As the elections loom ever closer, it is clear that inequality could prove an election stopper in May. Given Cameron’s continued calls for austerity, Milliband’s pledge for increased spending appears more suited to resolving this growing issue. Where the economy is concerned, voters will be forced to make one simple choice: to pocket their fortune now or look for prosperity in the future.
