---
title: "Rio After 2014: How the Favela will Triumph"
author: Olly Tapper
---

For many years favelas have been seen as ‘social blights’ or ‘urban cancers’ in Brazil and particularly Rio, a black mark on what is otherwise a rapidly emerging global player. Many see the favelas as limiting for Brazil’s development and a force preventing Brazil from unlocking its full potential as a global economic power. However, in recent times views of the favelas have started to change and as a result we are seeing the Brazilian government start to embrace the favelas as they realise that instead of being a barrier to the doorway of development they may be the key that unlocks it.

So why will the favela triumph? There are several reasons, most of which have emerged in the last few years. This shows just how quick the change in perception has been of favelas across the world. The reasons include:

## 1. The World Cup and Rio Olympics

The World Cup provided an opportunity for the Brazilian government to show the world and specifically the Western media that the favelas were not in fact as problematic as people thought. One of the major problems for the favelas in the past had been the way in which they had been portrayed by Western media, with papers such as the Daily Mail running stories such as: ‘Cleaning up Brazil's most dangerous favelas: How armed police are waging war on vicious drug cartels that rule the slums of Rio as they fight to make the city safe before the 2016 Olympic Games’. The combative nature of articles like this have historically not helped the image of the favelas. However, the World Cup helped change this perception, with documentaries run by the BBC and other news networks that showed the character and soul of the favelas and how they are in fact an intrinsic part of Brazilian culture. The BBC documentary showed profiles of local people in Rocinha (the largest favela in Brazil) and provided a more positive view of the favelas than before. Instead of the favelas being portrayed as dangerous we saw them as a part of Brazil that was important, not stunting to development at all.

Indeed the World Cup and the Olympics being held in Brazil has also showed the positive sporting aspects of the favelas. Many of the sporting stars in the World Cup came from favelas. One of these was Neymar, certainly the most famous current player in Brazil and a world football star. The World Cup has provided the recognition that the favelas produce sporting stars, which has made many in Brazil see the favelas as more important than previously. The exposing of the favelas being able to produce such stars and being recognised as the ‘samba capital of South America’ may not be economically important but is socially important. The only way for the favelas to be integrated into Brazil is for them first to be acknowledged as important to the country, then they can become integrated economically.

## 2. Pacification

In the last few years the government has implemented a management strategy for the favelas that may well actually result in positive change allowing the favelas to triumph. This process is pacification and is significantly different to strategies adopted in Brazil’s past. In the 1970s the feeling towards the favelas was that it would be better to get rid of them completely than to use them in a positive way. For that reason the military government of the day adopted a favela eradication policy which aimed to remove the problem completely, however, this was disastrous as it only led to more favelas popping up. It seems that Brazil has learnt from its mistakes though and the pacification plan is evidence of this. The process of pacification is to reclaim territories in favelas held by drug gangs and armed militia. This is obviously a very positive move and will in the long term benefit those living in favelas and indeed is suggestive of the government attempting to integrate favelas into society rather than marginalising them. Although favela management could not have been much worse than the favela eradication policy of the 1970s, the process of pacification is certainly a positive move by the government which will allow the favelas to triumph: economically, socially and politically.

# 3. The future

If we see that the main cause of favelas forming and indeed enlarging is rapid urbanisation and rural - urban migration then the future looks bright for the favelas. This is because the flow of migrants from the poor north-east of Brazil, which built up the favelas in previous decades, has slowed significantly in recent years, while some of the residents of the favelas have even decided to make the return journey. This counter urbanisation that Brazil seems to be experiencing is certainly making the government’s job a lot easier. This movement away from the favelas counteracts in some ways the high birth rates within them and so the government’s job in reintegration becomes slightly easier. The Pacification process certainly shows us the intentions of the government, they now believe that the favelas are marketable areas of their country: the samba capital of South America and the home of Neymar, these tag lines bring with them a sense of belonging and increased public perception of favelas. No longer are they social blights or urban cancers, they are the key to Brazil’s economic and social success as a rapidly emerging world power.
