---
title: "The World’s Youthful Populations: A Blessing or Burden?"
author: Michael Hammond
---

Elderly populations are the only age demographic which the media appears to care about anymore.  Japan, Germany and Italy constantly make news headlines with their high percentages of the population aged 65% of older (25%, 21% and 20% respectively) and subsequent discussion about what implications this will have on the society and structure of the country as a whole.  But what about youthful populations, with people aged less than 30 accounting for 50.5% of the global population in 2012?

In the past four or so decades medical advances and improved access to education and contraception around the globe have resulted simultaneously in soars in life expectancies and plummets in infant mortality rates especially in less developed countries - in 2012, 89.7% of the global population aged below 30 lived in emerging and developing economies.  Poorer countries (which when discussing young populations mainly refers to Northern African ones as well as those in the Arabian Peninsula) are now beginning to realize that having fewer children can be more economically beneficial and pragmatic especially considering that these offspring are more likely to live longer; Algeria’s fertility rate was 7.65 children per woman in 1960 but reached 2.82 in 2012.  However despite these improvements, these countries still do face multiple challenges which imped their development.  The AIDS/HIV epidemic which continues to plague the entire continent of Africa, resulting in around 3 million deaths annually means that a large proportion of the population is unable to live past 30.  In extreme cases such as that of Niger, most people do not even live past 15 with 50% of the population being under 14 years old.  These negative and positive factors working alongside one another mean that people within say Algeria, Libya, Egypt, Yemen are living longer than they used to, past their teen years, but their lives are still not particularly long in comparison to those of people in Western countries.  This means that the vast majority of society in these countries is made up by people aged 30 and under, with very few making up any other age demographics creating what is known as a ‘youth bulge.’

These bulges in the number of young people can bring about great economic and social prospects for the countries experiencing them.  Aside from requiring vast amounts of money in the form of medical care and perhaps having some political involvement especially in the UK with the rise of the so called ‘Grey’ vote, ageing societies tend not to have such great impacts on the rest of the country, occupying a much more passive stance.  Young people, on the other hand, have the rest of their lives to shape and mould both the structure and future of the country they live in.  They are at their peak of their mental and physical fitness, not requiring any assistance in the form of funds to help them do their jobs and are thus the driving force of the economy making up on average 52% of their country’s GDP.  Having this increased number of people who are of working age results in rapid increased economic growth and reverses the poverty cycle, especially in LICs where children contribute to the informal sector, an invaluable part of the country’s economy. They also have social impacts adding diversity and culture, creating an overall more interesting and liberal society than their predecessors.

Unfortunately, the most obvious and disturbing effect of youthful populations is increased civil unrest and violence as exemplified by the 2010 to 2012 Arab Spring.  The young are the most economically productive members of society however in North African and Arabian countries employment opportunities are scare leaving much of the youth unemployed and economically marginalized.  Coupled with an often older and autocratic political ruling party and system these young people begin to feel resentful and aggressive resulting in conflict in order to bring about what is perceived as a necessary change.  In the case of the Arab Spring this was mainly overthrowing dictators such as Gaddafi and replacing them some sort of democratic government that would take greater notice of young people and care for their needs.  Unsurprisingly countries which experienced instability during the Arab Spring had some of the highest percentages of the population under 24 in the world.  Yemen, Egypt and Iraq had 65.3%, 62.3% and 61.7% respectively of the population in that age bracket at the time.  This problem does not simply to countries involved in the Arab Spring; between 1970 and 1999 80% of civil conflicts across the world occurred in countries where 60% or more of the population was under the age of 30.

In summary, youthful populations are immensely powerful and present some of the world’s least developed countries with an opportunity to economically thrive and prosper as well as create more functional, stable and harmonious societies.  However this can only occur if governments begin to change their outlook and policies and tackle this ‘youth bulge’ by creating more jobs and harnessing young people’s potential and using their most valuable asset to their advantage.
