---
title: "Homophobic Language"
author: Albert Meek
---

“SOME PEOPLE ARE GAY. GET OVER IT!”. ‘Hmmmm’ is the first thing that springs to mind. These seven words, which have been plastered across billboards and buses all over London (if you haven’t seen them, you don’t get out enough), are part of a campaign by Stonewall, a charity which continually strives to end homophobia. In case you didn’t know, you can also get T-shirts, hoodies, and (wait for it) mugs with the immortal words splashed across them, that would of course label you as an offensively proud homosexual in a matter of seconds (because who else would own such things?) Sadly, no mugs have permeated the SPS common rooms; however, the effort to spread an egalitarian message has been ramped up in the biology department, which has been littered with A3 versions of the same poster. A slightly poorer show in the library (one of the biggest rooms in the school), where two smaller-than-playing-card sized signs whisper passive aggressively at a largely heterosexual population about how intolerant they are.

The reason for my hmmmm-ing is as follows: I do not like this slogan. To me, it screams (literally - exclamation marks seem to be a big deal) hostility, and an assumption that people at this school have a massive problem with homosexuals. They don’t. I know this; I can testify that no one has ever sought to fashion a crucifix out of a ruler and a glue stick and oust me from the school, in the name of Jesus or anyone else (e.g. Nigel Farage). In fact, I cannot recall more than one remark that was genuinely meant to make me feel ostracised or uncomfortable as an openly gay student. This is great for me, and the rest of the c. 10 not-heterosexual students at our school that I am aware of; but at the same time I am not ‘thankful’ that I work in such an ‘accepting environment’. I no longer breathe a sigh of relief when people don’t recoil if my sexual orientation is brought up. Why should brownie points be given to a person who lets the world know that they are accepting towards a minority group. The description of neutrality/positivity towards the LGBTQIA etc. etc. population (the list seems to keep growing) as ‘accepting’ or ‘tolerant’ suggests that there is a deep problem with anyone who isn’t straight (i.e. 10% of the population), and some nice guy has the decency to overlook it.

As someone once said (probably online, anonymously), ‘Homophobia is not a phobia. You are not scared. You are an arsehole.’ Even this, at our school, is an exaggeration. The ‘homophobic’ language that the school is trying to discourage is not people being scared. It’s not even people being arseholes. It’s people being ignorant. And I write that word in the nicest, most non-accusatory way I can. It is difficult to expect 13-18 year-olds not to feel awkward about such a topic (and combat said awkwardness by being overtly masculine, or indeed offensive) if they have not been introduced to the idea from a young age. Sexual orientation is not like race; it is invisible, and starts to determine itself at this age. It’s like an alarming and life altering game of duck-duck-goose. Who will it be? Who is it already? In the grand scheme of things, it really doesn’t/shouldn’t matter.

Whilst it’s obvious that same-sex relationships are not the same as heterosexual ones (they are in fact loads more fun), there’s a clear difference in that they are two guys or two girls, as opposed to a girl and a boy. Gasp. Is it really a big deal? You could compare it to an interracial relationship - a century ago, that was a reason for disownment. Nowadays, few people would even bat an eyelid. I see no reason why the same shouldn’t apply for a gay couple. In my opinion, a lot of people want attention, but not very many want attention for being gay. In that way, indifference should be the new acceptance. Like a gay person if you want. Hate a gay person if you want. But not because they’re gay. Do it because they are boring. Or because they vote labour.

Society is getting to the point where outspoken and aggressive homophobes are a vanishing minority; the only person who is likely to care is a close relative - probably an emasculated, conservative grandfather. Yet even whilst sitting in the art library, writing this article with less than 24 hours out of the four weeks I was given to do it remaining, there are loud and irritating sixth formers proclaiming that a friend’s art looks ‘gay’. Sadly, they are not noticing my cold stare of exasperation. I’m wearing them down, don’t worry.

I am in a state of discontent not because they are choosing to link negativity with a word that still means homosexual (it does, for those of you prepping the inevitable ‘evolution of language’ arguments). The point isn’t whether or not something is gay, or what the word gay means today. It’s about who is listening to your inoffensive “banter”. The majority of you will probably never know what being in the closet feels like. In fact in our year, averages dictate that there are about 10-15 more people who are yet to come out. In last year’s U8th, there were 9 guys who were openly gay/bisexual at the end of their final year. I do not accept that all of the ‘other team’ were out, probably not even by half. That is because the giant wardrobe we all inhabit at some point (hence the great dress sense) is suffocating, and terrifying, and for many people even telling their family is unthinkable for a long time. And I can testify that it is so very not good to hear a group that you are starting to identify with being tied to disapproval and hatred, before you’ve even admitted it to yourself.

I am not saying that you are all homophobic - mainly because I wanted this article to be positive and friendly, whilst getting the point across. But maybe just think about the consequences that your words have. Maybe your best friend is gay. Maybe the weird guy that no one speaks to/likes but he just hangs around in the same place all the time is gay. You do not, cannot know, and there will always be wild-card, macho person that you didn’t see coming.

So tread lightly.
