---
title: How to Form a Soc
author: "Alex Osmond & Milo Mahon"
---

*Have our writers misinterpreted the comedic values of Soc’s or have they confirmed your overarching feeling towards these meetings? Feel free to reply to criticise or support our two heavily satirical writers by emailing us at blackandwhite@stpaulsschool.org.uk.*

The School offers over 40 societies to its student body in a bid to further the intellectual breadth and depth of its young charges. Yet, to the socially ambitious Pauline the “Socs” simply represent another avenue through which they can establish themselves as a true SPS legendo. “Perhaps I too can be a paragon of zaniness, revered for his eclectic and cooky lifestyle,” you think as you watch an Upper Eighth former receive ecstatic applause for his latest crazy-funny outburst. “He’s so random!” your peers whisper admiringly. You know that his absolute madman has played the system to the letter - and following in his footsteps, here we will reveal how you too can be clapped for wearing a bowtie.

Your society must be a comedic one. Already I hear you cry - “I’m desperately unfunny, with little to no improvisational talent” - hush hush, ‘tis no matter, it has been done before and it will be done again. Think again of our zany Upper 8th - was he really that funny? Was anything he said witty, or even cogent? No, mon ami, it was not. Yet you and your peers were fooled - and you will employ the same levels of deception as you continue your inexorable rise. Comedy societies are great because everyone thinks they are funny, everyone is desperate to prove it, and you can accrue vast power very quickly by affecting confidence in the presence of others who are crippled by shame. See below for technical advice. You shall christen your new comedy troupe “GimpSoc”, or “Great Improvisational Society” (or something to that effect).
This name is hugely marketable to all of the aspiring “Gimps” in the lower school, keen to make their name as someone who is not a dead loser with no bant. So grab some mates who aren't quite as funny as you in your opinion (which is anyone because you’re the biggest thing since laughter!), and head on down to Drama Studio 2 for a bit of preparation work! Henceforth, this is your domain - the Gimp Dungeon, where anything from something quite funny to a massive pile of crap can be improvised, randomly, by you and your crew! Who you choose isn’t really a big deal, just make sure that at least two of the three members of your vanguard are too self-conscious to talk without the use of an online messaging platform. Then even you, the middling average Joe of comedy who still creases every time someone shouts “HESKEY IS A BEAAAAST”, will stand out from the crowd.

A couple of basic ground rules before we begin: The label of a comedy society should, after you’ve had a few weeks to establish your lack of banter, serve as a kind of cruel trick to potential audience members. Humour is not required. The beauty of calling your society “Great Improvisation Society”, is that it heavily implies humour, and you will always attempt to create humour but calling it improvisation allows for all of your shanter to fall back onto the rule that you don’t actually have to be funny: it’s all about the improv.
Second, and most important of all, swearing, gratuity of any kind and general smut is prohibited. This would simply make your show too edgy- and swearing is definitely not funny, ever. It merely shows a lack of intelligence. For instance, which out these two facts is more funny: ‘GimpSoc is terribly poor’ or ‘What a pile of shit GimpSoc is’
Doesn’t the moderate nature of the first sentence just make you laugh??


Due to your inevitable lack of skill in improvisation, the common theme surrounding GimpSocs shows should be highly absurd humour. Instead of having the formulate a realistic and funny joke that is easily judged- you and your merry band of  comic kooks can take refuge in the realm of the absurd. Quite often, this may in fact be the product of floundering around looking for something and then, you lay eyes upon any random object, say, an umbrella and then- in response to ‘what would you like to eat?’ you can reply with this non-sequitur and absolutely raucous response. Umbrellas aren’t food, silly! Instead of naming something edible, you’ve named something IN-edible and with no previous connection to the humour! Complete. Utter. Gold.

It’s very important to create a cult of personality if you want to groom your audience. In lieu of a personality, which is almost certainly the case (knowing you, you vapid sod!), how about you chuck in some kooky character traits instead?! A monocle for example is really far out and also makes you look like a total oddball - and all without spending an instant working on your actual personality, because your one is currently beyond terrible and it would be a travesty to waste any time on it! One Gimpsoc meeting you should try to permanently wrest control of the group from your co founders through the medium of improv. Suggest a game of freeze tag, and tag out one of your partners. Whatever the other actors position is, physically assault him as brutally as possible. Claim he used “SMUT!” to facilitate comedy as smut is VERBOTEN in all of comedy and justifies violence. Your group will now be in awe of you and worship you as the monocled God you are.

This level of absurdity to mask your comic inadequacy is only part of the great amount of persona based humour that has been used by other comedy societies. The key members of your society should don a kind of highly transparent, exaggerated character, all part of their absurd act. The most common character and one I recommend you use is the very english man who is always in a kind of daze- ready to whip out a confused ‘what?’ at any given moment in order to further dodge real improvisation- but its all part of this character and his cluelessness will become a constant source of humour for the show.

 Then of course, aside from the real performers, there will be the one from the audience who seems oblivious to how unfunny he is. He is your ally, use him well and unsparingly.
 This will in fact be the most enjoyable aspect of the show- it is hard to take enjoyment in the mediocrity of your key members’ but this big headed moron- normally taking the form of an overbold newcomer who is yet to work his way up the comedy hierarchy- is truly hilarious. With absolutely zero talent and far too much confidence than what his metal cased mouth, erupting acne and interest in current affairs (which he gleefully shall unleash in his humour) should afford him- he will be the only funny part of your show. He will get boos and be laughed at but his tenacity is unrivalled. He will in fact be spurred on- dipping into a variety of jokes- normally political (a good UKIP joke never goes amiss and is something that the comedy in St. Paul’s dearly lacks). Do not shun this audience member at the door, you need him to provide a reprieve for the rest of us from your comedic mediocrity.

Focusing on the concept of your comedy society, one should be aware that historically, the kind of people who take part in these societies pride themselves in having a great knowledge of comedic greats. Classic acts such as The Two Ronnies, Morecambe and Wise and the Pythons will greatly influence your brand of humour. However, here is the cruel twist: you are in fact far, far less funny than these stalwarts of comedy. Their influence is great enough to drive your society in the direction of scenario based- pseudo-sketches but your aspirations to be like these geniuses has also lured you into crashing and burning. This is the fundamental reason why it is essential that you erect the aforementioned shelter of absurdism.

So there you have it, your route to one laugh every 10 jokes- easy as. From here on in you’ll have to actually be funny to get laughs, so you’re done for the rest of your life. But you will be an SPS legendo and you weren't funny anyway so dive in and create your very own “GimpSoc”.
