---
title: "The Duty of St Paul’s School"
author: Hugh Laurence
---

*These are the writer’s opinions. If you have any comments, rebuttals or views on this matter, we urge you to email the B&W team to have them heard, and published in the next issue.*

St Paul’s is a school whose ambitions are plain: good GCSE results, good A level results and good university admissions rates. It frankly doesn’t care if students leave with backward views of extreme proportions, doesn’t care that they will be gifted influential positions with that mentality. God forbid this place tries to teach us how to behave in a civilised and liberal way that isn't on an ocr mark scheme, that isn't being examined at the end of the year and that definitely can't ‘go on my UCAS’.
It’s true that there has been the occasional seminar on homophobia, but that was more for the sake of convenience than anything else. It is a lot easier to run a school without having accusations of homophobic bullying slowing down the inexorable exam mill from churning out another set of meaningless results. If that wasn't the case then why don't we have seminars about elitism, or misogyny?


That’s because one student can’t be elitist to another student in a place like this, and one student can’t be misogynist to another in an all boys school. It apparently doesn’t matter that these sentiments are accepted as the norm and will pervade well into the future of many boys, nor does it matter that the boys from this school will be in leading positions of society whilst still holding and sometimes promoting these reactionary and destructive views. It doesn't matter because none of that has any impact in the quotidian running of St Paul’s school.
It can be, and is, totally ignored, and in some incredible and frankly despicable circumstances actually promoted by the many exalted grand overseers and their multiple bureaucratic underlings. By far the worst example of this at St Paul’s is its abusive relationship with Feminism. Misogyny is rife here. It is in every classroom, every tutor group, every games session and one only needs to walk past the lunch queue or through the atrium to here about the various “sluts” that are in the pathetic pubescent news today, or the various female teachers whose subject is irrelevant but skirt is all important. It is so deeply ingrained that it is impossible to say the governing body of St Paul’s is unaware of it, and anyone who argues so need only look at the annual fourth form assembly; organised and authorised by our school, this year, the talk was given by Upper Eighth boys that compared girls schools to restaurants and the girls at the schools to items on the menu. Misogyny here is quite literally institutional.
There currently exists no feminist programme and no ambition from the governing body to rectify the endemic sexism that takes place here despite repeated calls from myself and other members of my year that a change needs to be made. The fact that joint feminist society is voluntary means that it fails in this respect and does not come close to rectifying this problem as those who need to listen to what is said at these meeting are not attending and are pressured not to.I heard a fifth form boy being called a girl by his peers for even considering it. Boys spend the best part of some of the most formative years of their life at this school, years that in many ways dictate what they will become at a later stage. Clearly, St Paul’s shouldn't just be a place where you learn Latin irregular verbs or how the digestive system works, it has a duty to show Paulines their privilege and the circumstances of those less fortunate and a duty to ensure that Paulines won't be going into the wider world with a destructive and ignorant mentality. If the school fails to do so, it will only be further contributing to an establishment in this country that serves to hold back equitable social change that any sane intelligent person would advocate fully. Unless St Paul’s wants to become more archaic and reactionary than it already is and is perceived to be, this is an issue it cannot afford to ignore.
