---
title: "Sanctions and their Effects on the Russian People"
author: Dmitry Buyanovsky
---

Russia’s deputy prime minister laughed off US and EU sanctions against Russia tweeting “Comrade @BarackObama, did some prankster come up with the list (of sanctions)?”. The weapon in the duel between Vladimir Putin and Barack Obama is “economic pain”. So, how has it affected the working class of Russia?

The sanctions against Russia prevent its banks and the country’s largest corporations from receiving loans from Western banks. This has resulted in Russian banks having to pay more to borrow money, meaning that the interest rates on loans taken out by people have risen, resulting in people having less available disposable income. Consequentially, less money is being spent in the economy and thus the country’s economic turnover has greatly reduced.

As though this wasn’t enough, Putin was not going to let any action by the West against Russia go unnoticed and unavenged. “The Russian Duma” hastily drew up a list of contra-sanctions, mainly banning the import of European foods into Russia. Putin was hoping that the EU would call-off its sanctions due to the threat he put-up; the EU however proved as stubborn as Putin himself, insistent that they were not going to let Russia win. One might ask “were the Russian contra-sanctions necessary?” The simple answer is no. All they did is inflict further pain onto the Russian economy and the Russian people, as the variety of food in shops greatly decreased, due to most foods usually found in supermarkets (80%) being banned. Due to the scarcity of food, prices shot-up, so the normal working man is finding it harder to deal with the increasing cost of living, as he is having to pay higher interest rates on his mortgage, while also accommodating for higher food prices. Not only this, but the working class citizen must now deal with the fact that his beloved Dziugas cheese (as well as many other imported products) has disappeared from the supermarket shelf. Therefore what benefit have these proudly announced Russian contra-sanctions brought to the Russian population? None.

With Russia’s political instability and poor relations with the West, investments into Russia have been frozen and money is being withdrawn from the country. Factories have been halted due to lack of demand (for example the Volga Car Factory in Togliatti, as no one is buying cars in the current economic climate). The number of redundancies is increasing weekly, as companies fight to keep their doors open (7500 redundancies at the Volga Car Factory). Those that remain employed, suffer from reduced, unadjusted for inflation wages, even though the inflation rate in Russia is at an all time high. The value of the Russian rouble has reduced enormously over the last year. In 2013, $1 USD exchanged for 30 RUB; in 2014, $1 USD trades for nearly 40 RUB (a decrease in the value of the RUB by 50%!). With its value crumbling daily, people are exchanging their roubles for any other stable currency that they are able to lay their hands on, such as the US dollar and the Pound Sterling.

A conscientious reader might be asking “why are the people not doing anything against this brainless leader?”. The answer is brainwashing and propaganda. The working people of Russia are surrounded by propaganda daily on television, radio, banners, and more. Most of the working class does not have the desire to gain insight into politics and try to understand the situation for themselves. Instead they rely on the information to be spoon-fed to them during their daily newscast. With the news on Russia’s main Channel One only glorifying the President and his administration, while portraying the West as a nefarious force trying to unjustifiably attack Russia, it is understandable why the majority of the population is so pro-Putin and anti-Western, especially in smaller towns and cities outside of Moscow. While the truth is being concealed from the people, Putin’s politics are leading Russia to an economic catastrophe.

While Putin continues to try to prove to the West that he has the bigger “balls”, Russia and its recessive economy are suffering. With unemployment, inflation, interest rates and food prices rising, while wages fall, I see no optimism for Russia and its people under Putin’s rule, but rather an economic catastrophe that will leave Russia and its people completely impoverished.
