---
title: Containing the Dragon
author: Adam Rachman
banner: china.jpg
light: light
---

All of the students at St Paul's, and the most of the parents and staff, were born into a quiet empire. The global cultural, military and economic dominance of the United States since the end of World War Two is so ingrained in our society today and so universal that often we fail to appreciate the awe inspiring influence which one nation wields over the entire planet. The vast majority of people alive today were born into an American earth, but the signs suggest we are reaching the end of the ‘American Age’, and we may well die in a new world, a Chinese world.

Currently, compared to the US, no other country has comparable international influence. The US is the third most populous nation in the world, the largest economy and its military spending is more than that of the next eight nations combined. But US influence is waning. A new nation is taking the world stage, one with roughly four times the population, which looks set to be, the world’s largest economy by the mid 2020s. China, is rapidly becoming the superpower of the future. Throughout history, time and time again, the shuffling of the great global powers has resulted in conflict. The rise of Germany laid the way for World War One, and many fear the rise of China will lead to World War Three. Here in the West we assume the spark for such a conflict would come from the autocratic and intimidating behemoth of China, but the our current panicked resistance of the inevitable Chinese rise poses an arguably greater threat. The future of world peace not only rests on how China exercises its power but also heavily on how we the Western world react to  growing Chinese power.

In 1823, US president James Monroe issued the eponymous Monroe declaration, stating that any European interference in the Americas would be viewed as an act of aggression against the United States, and would merit an aggressive response in turn. This declaration has underpinned the establishment of an American sphere of influence, in which the US dominated two continents  politically and economically. Today, roughly two centuries later, the US still maintains significant influence. Not only has it exercised its great influence in the Americas, but through diplomacy and warfare the US has carved itself an informal empire. Its influence reaches thousands of miles west to Japan, a nation which it governed for seven years, after the second world war, guiding and moulding a country of over 100 million towards an American style system of democracy and capitalism. Its reach also extends east to the Arabian peninsula where it maintains dozens of military bases, to Pakistan and Afghanistan, and of course into Europe where it has many bases in the UK, Spain, Germany and Bulgaria to name a few.  

Much of the tension between the US and China has been caused by China’s desire to impose itself in East Asia. The US fears Chinese aggression in the East and South China Seas and in Southeast Asia and admittedly these are not unfounded. For example recently China set up a new settlement, Sansha City, on the disputed Paracel islands. The settlement has a land area of roughly 13 km squared, slightly larger than the area of Richmond Park. But China claims it gives its rights over a sea area the size of  Mexico - or France, the UK, Germany and Spain combined. China has engaged in fiery rhetoric and threatening military manoeuvres directed at its neighbours who contest its claims to the majority of the islands in the South China Sea. In response the US has reaffirmed its support of the nations China is currently squabbling with, reasserting its mutual defense agreement with Japan and performing joint military exercises with the Philippines and its former enemy Vietnam.

The implication is that America will go to war with China, rather than concede its allies territorial claims in East asia or sacrifice its own influence. More generally, America is intent on denying China dominance of its own backyard, the very dominance that America claims in its own hemisphere/ Unsurprisingly this policy of containment and encirclement has not fostered positive relations between the two largest global economies. The USA claims to protect the sovereign nations that China is threatening, but this seems rather ironic coming from a nation with such great international sway and not an exemplary record on respecting the sovereignty of nations. The USA in its time has deposed various governments, such as the Iranian government in 1953 and the government of Iraq, 50 years later, in 2003, as well supporting many autocratic and inhumane regimes such as General Pinochet’s Chile or ironically Saddam Hussein in the Iran-Iraq War. It is understandable, therefore that China complains of American hypocrisy. Indeed the area it wishes to exert its influence upon is rather modest by American standards. While America’s reach is truly global, China‘s current ambitions are confined to its immediate neighbours..

Of course hypocrisy does not necessarily mean the USA is wrong to worry. Undemocratic China bullying smaller nations is not an appealing prospect. But Chinese bullying may have its limits. China has maintained a distance from the internal affairs of other countries which compared to the USA is remarkable. Despite its growing status, China consistently has shown little interest in intervening in sovereign states and compared to the USA has been more committed to maintaining peace. Since the rise of Deng Xiaoping and capitalism in 1980, China has over three decades avoided any type of international military conflict altogether. Over the same period, the US has been involved in several overseas military conflicts, from the Balkans to Panama and Grenada as well as the Middle east multiple times and Afghanistan.

Even in widely supported international efforts, China has refused to be sucked in, vetoing intervention in Syria recently for example. Whether its policy of non-intervention is always good is disputable, but what it demonstrates is is that China does not have conquest on its mind.

Some might point to Chinese threats towards Taiwan, or more topically Hong Kong, as evidence of aggression. But these threatening moves are special cases; fairly or not, they are justified by the Chinese on the grounds that Taiwan and Hong Kong are part of China and should like the mainland bend to Beijing. Beijing is preoccupied with keeping all of China under control, but probably less interested on absorbing other nations.

The ethical justification for China’s threats towards Taiwan and Hong Kong is questionable, but the silver lining is that China seems only interested in reigning in its own people, rather than foreigners. Its argument over the control of islands in the South China Sea is also based on this idea, as historically they were controlled by China. South-East Asia, although composed of tributary states, was never part of China proper and this is reflected in the lack of Chinese claims on these nations’ territory. More encouragingly China has as yet, refrained from using military force against either Taiwan or Hong Kong. Admittedly this is probably partly due to fear of US reaction, but then again when China was still an underdeveloped third world nation, it did clash with the US, for example in Korea and in Vietnam. China today is far stronger and more developed than under Mao, yet it has not confronted the US since that period.

The US, whether it likes it or not, will have to deal with China and a world influenced by it. However, a Chinese world is not necessarily a zero sum one, Chinese power does not necessitate the fall of the US or a sacrifice of the American standard of living. In the end the US is faced with two choices, to fight the inevitable or to accept and work with a shift in global power.

Let’s hope it chooses wisely.
