---
title: "Britain’s High Street: Rest in Peace?"
author: "CHRIS K ????"
---

In January 2013 HMV went bust. Across the UK big yellow signs were plastered onto HMV store windows with huge black lettering reading ‘STORE CLOSING’, EVERYTHING MUST GO’. I watched as shoppers began to stream into my local HMV store, taking advantage of its month-long sale to buy albums they would have usually bought on the internet. Even I joined them in the end. As I pushed my way to the counter one thing occurred to me that would no doubt have occurred to many others: this was the first time in two years since I had bought something in HMV. Until now all of my shopping had taken place on the internet; I was a frequent user of Amazon and had bought the entirety of my Christmas presents online last year - not once had I visited the high street. When I asked friends about their shopping habits my fears were confirmed - more and more people were using the internet to satisfy their consumerist needs and the high street was suffering as a result.

Unable to accept this tragedy I looked at the facts to validate my hypothesis. 15% of all shops in high streets are either empty or boarded up, 140 retailers are in a “critical” situation and may fail, 30% more than last year and almost £1 in every £10 spent by shoppers now involves internet purchases. Even Christmas, the time of year high street retailers usually heap up profits bears evidence of the continuing decline of high street visits. Last Christmas alone sales fell by 2.2% and with online purchases increasing this is expected to continue. There’s no doubt, the high street is dead- and if not actually dead then certainly at death’s door. Why is this so?

A Telegraph article by Libby Purves proved a valid answer to this. She argued that the regular shopper was to blame, describing in her article the ‘disgusting’ behaviour of shoppers who abuse the high street. The first of these crimes is called ‘showrooming’, whereby the customer enters a store, spends time examining an appliance he or she would like to buy and promptly leaves again, only to buy the same gadget on the internet for a lower price. Meanwhile the store has had to pay lighting, heating, insurance and maintenance costs including salaries whilst getting nothing from the customer in return. Another ‘disgusting habit’ mentioned in her article was ‘de-shopping’. This was something most commonly practiced by women, who would buy an outfit in a high street shop and wear it for a special event, keeping the price tag out of sight. The following morning they would return it to the shop and get a full refund, claiming it was faulty or they had changed their mind. In this way customers are able to hire expensive items of clothing for free while the shop pays the costs previously mentioned, suffering as a result.

In the wake of huge online retailing success some think internet retailers should make concessions so that the high street isn’t so significantly disadvantaged in the face of multinational companies such as eBay and Amazon. ‘We have to look at whether there should be a fairer way to get a better level playing field between online and high street services’ argued Caroline Flint, the Shadow Energy Secretary. By this she meant creating an online sales tax, something, which, would imitate the normal rent and fees a high street retailer has to pay. However, in an already overtaxed nation, making internet retailers pay for something which doesn’t apply to them, just because they invented something which is cheaper, faster and altogether better than what high street retailers can offer admittedly sounds absurd. The reality of the competitive world we live in is that retailers must fight for every single customer. Unfortunately the high street hasn’t done that; it hasn’t been able to adapt or respond to the increasing threat of online retailing and as a result, its continuing decline is no real surprise. But then, where did the high street go wrong?

In a BBC article, Megan Lane described the history of the high street in Britain, highlighting the point at which it went from success to failure. In her view, the golden age for the high street was in the 1960s when people flocked into high street shops to buy fashionable clothing at extraordinarily low prices. In those days the strategy of retailers was simple - maintain a wide range of products and keep prices low - this was largely successful. Nowadays however, much has changed and well, high street retailers haven’t. ‘I strongly believe that as long as traditional retailers are selling the same goods, less conveniently and at a higher price, they will continue to die out’ Martin Macdonald, inbound marketing director of Expedia told the Guardian. The problem is that high street retailers have continued to use the same strategy that worked for them fifty years ago. Nowadays new technologies and competition from online retailers has rendered their strategy useless and an unwillingness to adapt to this new threat is slowly killing the high street. Survival of the fittest is the way forward in this world, and there is only one way left for shops to survive.

In one sentence, the high street has to stop competing with internet retailers in terms of price and speed and should instead focus on their unique selling points. ‘High streets survive when they are fun, interesting places to go - you can’t join friends and have a coffee online, you can’t have a haircut online; there are certain things that we will always need high streets for and they need to reinvent themselves in that way’ said Grant Chapps on the TV series *Question Time*. High street retailers have to start embracing the new way of trading the internet has introduced. Some retailers such as Apple and John Lewis have already started doing this with huge success and others should learn from them. Stores should become showrooms to display goods rather than huge warehouses packed with merchandise, live demonstrations of products at set times should be organised, click and collect schemes should be introduced to retail stores and most importantly retailers should make a trip to town more than just a shopping experience - only then will the high street survive. What lies before us is an age of adaptation and redevelopment for the high street - the internet and high street *should* be able to co-exist together, it is how they do this that is for high street retailers to decide.
