---
title: The Rise of Hispanic Power in the US
author: Michael Hammond
---

In early March 2014, for the first time in history, there was no longer a white American majority in the US’ most populous state of California. Hispanics officially became a majority ethnicity, making up just over 40% of the documented population, joining New Mexico as the two states in the United Sates which have majority minorities; in both cases, Hispanics or *Latinos* are the dominant ethnicity.  Across America, there are 54 million people who would refer to themselves as ‘Hispanic” (making up around 19% of the entire populace), a term loosely used to describe anyone descended from a Spanish speaking country and sharing the same cultural heritage.  This means that there are more Spanish-speakers in the US than any other country on the planet apart from Mexico (surpassing Spain, Colombia and Argentina).

In the past, the US has had other states where whites were outnumbered by another race demographic, but in all such situations it was Afro-Americans who were making up the highest percentages of that particular state’s population.  This trend was prominent in the Deep South during the 19th century, but slowly declined until 1930 when, in Mississippi, black people were replaced by whites as the state’s majority ethnicity.  Immigrant communities from Mexico, Puerto Rico and other Latin American countries have long been established in the US. California is one notable example, a state which was originally colonised by the Spanish and then became part of Mexico for 29 years.  Hispanic explorers and Spanish conquistadors founded practically every city on the West Coast; Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Diego, San Jose (note that they all have Spanish names).  After all there is a saying in Spanish which goes something along the lines of ‘Without indigenous Mexico, Los Angeles would have never been created.’  

It has only been in the past 30 years or so that Hispanic population percentages have begun creeping up on those of whites.  The sudden influx around 1980 was mainly due to a sharp increase in the availability of jobs as cities began to undergo rapid urbanisation and grow exponentially.  This caused large numbers of Hispanics, particularly from Central American countries to flock to the South Western United States (where 40% of Hispanics are distributed), and since then the numbers have carried on rising.  

But what does all this mean besides an overall increase in population and a fairly significant shift in demographics and percentages?  Well most importantly, Hispanic culture and influences are becoming ingrained in US society.  In Southern California, Spanish is overhead just as often as English and companies are beginning to pick up on this socio-economic change.  There are 20 media outlets solely dedicated to delivering world news in Spanish as well as delivering a large portion of information on Latin American Affairs.  ABC has partnered up with Univision to produce a subsection which focuses solely on Hispanic media and Fox has created MundoFox which also airs news in Spanish nationally.  In fact, America’s most popular local TV station is ‘KMEX Noticias Chanel 34’ a Spanish news broadcaster based in LA.  It’s not just news outlets that dominate US television sets; the trashy telenovelas filled with murders and affairs attract roughly the same amount of viewers as ‘Dallas’.  In terms of business, Latino owned enterprises grow three times faster than the average American one and contribute 8 billion dollars to the economy every year.  Some of the world’s largest and most well known brands including Ron Bacardi and Goya Foods, are Hispanic owned and run businesses.  The signs of growing Hispanic dominance are evident just walking down the street, for every American-style-Diner there are three Mexican taquerias, all English street signs have their translation below and if you walk into a shop you are addressed in Spanish then English.

It would seem as if America needs to realise fairly swiftly the scale of Hispanic power and importance and the exceptional rate at which it is growing.  New Mexico and California are now both Latino dominated states, and it looks as if the US’ second largest state of Texas may be next (38.2% of residents are Latin American).  Looking at the broader picture, it’s not hard to envision a United States whereby in 2050, as some projections suggest, more people will speak Spanish as a first language than English.
