---
title: Scottish Devolution and the Breakup of the United Kingdom
author: Oliver Besley
---

Last month, in Scotland, there was a referendum, a decision and the potential for arguably the most significant British constitutional moment for three hundred years. Indeed one might argue that the united British identity itself was at stake as the inhabitants of Scotland went to the polls to answer the simple question; ‘should Scotland be an independent country?’ There was a palpable sigh of relief, following a few rather uncomfortable polls for the ‘no’ vote, as the news emerged in the early hours of the morning that Scottish independence had been rejected and Britain remained united as a state.

Alongside the relief, however, stood the stark realisation that 45 percent of those who had gone to the polls had done so with the intention of breaking up the United Kingdom. This 45 percent still wished to ‘go it alone’ in an independent Scotland in spite of the promises by the three largest Westminster party leaders that ‘devo-max’ (more eloquently described as full fiscal autonomy) would be given to Scotland following a ‘no vote’.

Despite this rather bleak result, there is some comfort that can be drawn given the circumstances under which the referendum took place.

The mere wording of the question was completely in favour of pro-independence; consider how different the dynamic of the entire campaign would have been if the question had been: ‘should Scotland remain part of the U.K.?’ On this point, David Cameron must bear a considerable burden of responsibility for his complacency. Whilst the Scottish National Party’s victory in the 2011 Scottish parliamentary elections (which included the manifesto promise of an independence referendum) gave Mr Salmond a mandate for a referendum, the highly significant constitutional nature of this promise should have kept Cameron in the driving seat on the terms and timing of the vote. Yet Cameron found himself totally out-foxed. The foolish decision to allow the SNP controlled Scottish parliament to legislate for the referendum resulted in over two years of campaigning that opened an opportunity for the pro-independence movement to close the significant gap against them. Indeed, the timing of the vote came to be highly in favour of the ‘yes’ vote, considering September 2014 would follow Scotland hosting the Commonwealth Games as an individual nation, the 700th anniversary of the Battle of Bannockburn (a victory for the Scots over the English) and arguably most significantly, over 4 years into what the half-sighted would happily see as a Tory government encompassing austerity including the flawed under-occupancy penalty, better known by many as the ‘bedroom tax’. This final element only served to lend a false legitimacy to the SNP’s ludicrous idea that the Scottish people were not properly represented by the Westminster Parliament- despite a Scottish Chancellor of the Exchequer in Gordon Brown for the 13 years preceding 2010 and a government including both a Scottish Prime Minister and Chancellor for the last three years.

However, the real irresponsibility for the near break-up of Great Britain can be found during the first term of Brown’s predecessor as Prime Minister, Tony Blair, and the Scotland Act of 1998 which began the Scottish devolution that would ultimately foster a rise of the false nationalistic promises of the SNP. Before I proceed further, I should like to make clear that I, in principle, fully support devolution from centralised government. It is clear in my mind that in certain areas of legislation, it is evidently preferable to bring the decision-making process closer to those affected and also to allow consideration of local demographic needs. To understand the objections to this devolution some basic history of Scottish devolution must be understood. The issue which would come to be known as the ‘West Lothian question’, and more recently the ‘English question’, was first raised in the House of Commons by Tam Dalyell (Labour MP for West Lothian) in 1977: it presented the scenario of a situation following the devolution of powers to Scotland where Scottish MPs were able to vote on legislation affecting the rest of the country but not Scotland. The problems of such a scenario were exacerbated by the disproportionately large number of Scottish MPs compared with the number of inhabitants in Scotland. The first major attempt at devolution came in the form of the 1978 Scotland Act; the referendum on this resulted in the rejection of the Act as 40 percent of the registered Scottish electorate failed to vote in favour of it. Devolutionary attempts were put on hold during 18 years of Conservative government and, indeed, John Major’s 1992 general election campaign saw a specific rejection of the prospect. When Blair was swept to victory in May 1997 with an extraordinary overall majority of 179 seats, a referendum was held within six months in which over three quarters of Scottish inhabitants who voted supported the creation of a devolved Scottish parliament. Whilst the Labour general election victory, combined with a referendum on Scottish devolution being included in their manifesto, arguably gave a mandate for this, the total ignorance in regard to the twenty year-old West Lothian question and the lack of a serious attempt to curb the disproportionate number of Scottish MPs made the 1998 Scotland Act fundamentally constitutionally irresponsible. Whilst I would advocate that a large amount of New Labour reform was for the better, the rise of Scottish nationalism since 1998 has demonstrated clearly the short-term populist fantasy that surrounded the implementation of Scottish devolution.

Besides the evident constitutional issues of the West Lothian question which were made a reality by the Act, the creation of a degree of political division between nations was extraordinarily risky. Furthermore, one might say that devolution in Wales and Scotland in 1997 was purely an act of faux democratic reform and actually highly preferable electorally for Labour to politically entrench their power in these nations when support for their main rivals in the Conservatives had dramatically dwindled to having no MPs in either country. Whilst some argue that it was a genuine attempt to put an end to the rise of Scottish nationalism and the SNP, the risk of an escalation of political division was even more likely at a time of such stark political polarisation in these regions. Moreover, the lack of the concept of legal entrenchment in the British uncodified constitution meant (and still means today) that in political reality, any shift in the devolved powers is to increase their number; to add to this, there was a total lack of an attempt at cohesive devolution over the rest of the country. This meant that the referendum was an undemocratic triumph of a minority where there could have been a decision of a majority across the country.

Post-devolution, the use of the Barnett Formula to determine spending in Scotland has seen the latest public spending per head in Scotland around 19 percent higher than in England and is also responsible for the often referenced lack of university tuition fees for Scottish residents. Despite attempts to claim that this is justified by relatively short term oil revenues, this much derided formula and the constitutional bias towards devolution has allowed the SNP to create a sense of success due to their leadership while problems can be blamed on the Westminster government’s actions and the power it retains. Whilst it is not possible to deny that devolution has had some of the benefits that well managed devolution can offer, it has also had the total opposite effect of its intention in galvanising the SNP’s preaching of a nationalistic non-solution to Scotland’s problems, as UKIP preaches an E.U. exit as its own non-solution to the United Kingdom’s problems.

As for the events of the recent past, it is utterly shocking that it has taken a full pledge of ‘devo-max’ in an embarrassing sell-out to save the Union and effectively a full appeasement of nationalism to create a proper debate on the matter of English devolution and a proper search for a solution to the West Lothian question. Even then the creation of an English parliament may be another step towards the breakup of Great Britain as separatist myths of greater prosperity by going it alone may indeed begin to fester. I do not wish to see this and I doubt very few across this country who feel a proud sense of history in their British identity as well as their national identity as English, Welsh, Scottish or Northern Irish would wish to see this either. Devolution and federalism is inevitably, and should be, part of the path to the continuing progress of a modern democracy in the United Kingdom. However disparities in this drawn across the boundaries of nationhood have created a perfect breeding grounds for the short-term, false nationalistic solutions with which Alex Salmond and co. have tempted many of the Scottish people. Whilst Westminster retains its legal sovereignty, it will take a strong leader to push through devolutionary reform that brings consistency and equality to devolution across the country and abandons the view that such political restructuring should be determined by boundaries of nationhood. A solution that allows people of all nations to be proud and thrive in their own cultural identity but does not create a political divide between these nations thus keeping the United Kingdom as one but with a democratic system that is closer to its people, the British people.
