---
title: "Professor Bailey: Sporting Career and St Paul’s"
author: "James Ritchie"
---

__B&W: To start with a relatively easy question, you have played both cricket and rugby to a very high standard, but which do you actually prefer to play and which do you prefer to watch?__

I gained greater pleasure over a longer period playing cricket, partly because of the benign climate, but also because of the game’s technical intricacy.  Playing rugby to a higher standard for longer periods in an inclement climate was demanding and, after a while, more tedious and too familiar.  Tedium and familiarity shaved the edges off enjoyment.  Having said that, I now watch more rugby than cricket, so the break has restored my love for the game.

__When you were at school, where you first started playing rugby, did you pursue rugby and other sports through other means outside of school?__

From as early as I can remember, around the age of four or five, my father took me to watch rugby league every other week.  He was secretary of Featherstone Rovers, who were one of the poorer but more interesting rugby league sides, so I was brought up watching and experiencing the culture of professional club rugby league and became fascinated by the game.  I didn’t pick up a rugby ball in earnest until I went to secondary school in Ipswich, whose main sport was rugby.  I wasn’t an especially talented player until about 17 years old, when suddenly my body, which had been imbalanced and dysfunctional, suddenly achieved some kind of equilibrium.  In those days school 1st XVs played against men’s invitation sides, and after one such game the local club team asked me to play for them.  The captain asked my father if I could play for them, rather like an old-fashioned marriage proposal.  So, by the time I was doing my A-Levels, I was playing simultaneously for the school and for a club side.

__After your three years at Durham, you went on to a PhD in History at Cambridge where you were captain of the rugby team.  Could you shed some light on this process? Was it done through an election by your peers or did your coach select himself?__

At Cambridge, the fifteen Blues who played in the varsity match elected their captain for the next year soon after the game. I was elected in my second year (1983) and third year (1984).  Then, in my final year, Gavin Hastings - who went on to become a British Lion - was elected as captain.

__After your time at Cambridge, you went on to play Rugby Union at London Wasps.  Can you describe what it was like to achieve such success over such a long and brutal career?__

In 1984, whilst still at Cambridge, I joined London Wasps after the varsity match.  Having played back at Cambridge in the build-up to the 1985 varsity match, I then returned permanently to Wasps and remained there until 1990.  Wasps reached the cup final two years in a row at Twickenham and were beaten by Bath both years.  In the 1986 final, Wasps picked the then Harrow School fly-half, Gareth Rees, two days before the match due to an appalling illness/injury crisis: we only trained with him twice before the grand final.  We lost.  Just.  He went on to captain Canada on multiple occasions.  Wasps also won the Premiership in 1990, at which point I felt that I could hardly run again, let alone lift another Premiership title, so I retired.

__You also had several caps for England and were selected for the Barbarians, which of these would you value more highly, representing your nation or being selected for the Barbarians?__

Both were a great honour.  The Barbarians had a more extensive fixture list involving club sides in those days, although selection was always a prestigious and sought after achievement.  Their fixture list today is exclusively against national sides.  So in the 1980s national selection trumped Barbarian honours.  Similarly, international caps were much harder to come by.  There were fewer international matches in any season and fewer overseas visits.  There were no tactical replacements, only replacements for players suffering medically-certified injuries during the game.  So the opportunities to obtain a cap in the 1980s were much fewer than they are now.  Even if you obtained one, it was even harder to accumulate more because selection policies were fickle: there was no videoing of club matches, and selectors could not easily keep track of form.  The England selection policy in the eighties was rather like a well-oiled extractor fan: inputted for one game and then spun out into the wilderness for three years…a place to which I became comfortably acclimatized.  It didn’t matter.  Representing one’s country is the pinnacle of sporting aspiration and an immense privilege.

__Would you therefore say your try against Fiji was the pinnacle of your sporting career as a rugby player?__

I didn’t have a vertiginous England career.  I won seven caps, and most international players reckon that, even now, it takes ten to fifteen caps before you really adjust to the intensity and the pace.  That was one of the first things that struck me during my first cap against South Africa in 1984 - everything was a blur, moving faster than anything I’d ever experienced, despite the fact that I was reasonably well prepared by playing at the highest level of domestic rugby.  The pinnacle COULD have been reaching the corner with the last touch of the match in the 1990 grand slam decider against Scotland at Murrayfield, when England needed a converted try to win.  I got to within five yards (pitches were measured in imperial then), but since then on countless occasions in my fertile mind I scored.  Okay, the try against Fiji would have to be the high point.

__During all this you still played County cricket for Suffolk, how did you cope with all of this?__

Minor counties cricket was an amateur game, and chronologically confined within just two months of the year: so it was quite intense but manageable with relative ease in a congested diary.  So as long as I wasn’t on a summer rugby tour, I would play cricket for love.  It was quite easy to pick up and put down, so it was a distraction and a relaxation, although Imran Khan bowling 90 mph bouncers at Hove in 1984 was more laxative than relaxing.

__Was it a source of pride when you were presented with an honorary Palatinate award by Durham University?__

Durham University present this award once every year to an alumnus who has subsequently excelled in sport.  Their preferred selection wasn’t available that year, so I was invited at the last minute!  It was meant to recognize both my Wasps and England career, and a subsequent career as an unpaid administrator in the game, particularly in student rugby at various levels.  I returned to Durham for the presentation dinner in 2003, and it was a pleasure to consume at least one decent dinner during all my Durham days!  I am now the proud owner of an engraved, garish, bright purple bowl, which hosts flowers somewhere in our house.

__To focus on St Paul’s, what are your thoughts on the SPS Barmy Army who were out in full force against KCS? Is it a good thing that the 1st XV have such a strong support, willing to travel to away games to cheer them on?__

The presence of vocal, enthusiastic and eager support is a spur to the 1st XV players, because they have said as much.  It’s an excellent thing that the barmy should wish to support the team.  However, there should be an element of courtesy, propriety and dignity in the way we support, because it is hugely important to me that our actions underline both the values of sport and of the school.  However, so as long as those properties are observed, I’m an enthusiastic supporter of, er, support.

__In the future then do you believe there will be more room for support at home games and that a bigger emphasis should be placed on encouraging more boys to attend and support St Paul’s teams, regardless the sport, in order to encourage the sense of community we foster and encourage at this school?__

In the distant past, most schools at some stage compelled boys to attend particular matches, which provided a combination of vociferous support as well as some indifferent, cold, miserable support.  We will never compel Paulines to support again, unless there was a major, one-off, fixture where we were involved in the latter stages of a national competition.  Beyond that, people need to support school sport because they enjoy watching, and choose to do so, rather than because they are compelled.  Watching sport at St Paul’s has rekindled my interest in live spectating, because the standard is high and the enthusiasm is infectious.  We could encourage more people to kindle their interest by providing more facilities - hot coffee, steaming bacon buttes, and, in the future, perhaps developing hospitality facilities in a rebuilt boathouse.  Potentially such developments could even provide a viewing stand from the top floor, which would add to the sense of occasion and to the expression of community.  Communities only really exist when they come together, and the rugby touchline or the cricketing boundary are both good opportunities for that expression.

__So the future of sports at St Paul’s is looking bright?__

I think so - the standard is phenomenal given we don’t have sport scholars, and participation rates are consistently and unusually high: running six rugby teams at under fourteen and even four at under sixteen every week.  I don’t know another day school in the country that performs to that level and to that depth without sport scholars.  The other attribute is the eclectic range of available sports.  The quality of what we might regard as “minority sports” (in terms of participatory numbers rather than hierarchy of one over another) is remarkable: fives champions, squash champions, and so on.  In particular, the number and performance of rowers over the last four years have transformed, and is a source of immense pride.  The impact that the school has had on the national stage, and the success that it has recently enjoyed in producing international class rowers, is phenomenal, and something that we ought to build upon and further encourage.
