---
title: "Minnows in Sport"
author: "Fintan Owens"
---

Many questions such as the following are asked not only within the world of sport, but also in every other area of life: “should they make a new Friends movie? Should learning Mandarin Chinese be part of the national curriculum?” Now, after a rough few weeks for the minnows of international sport, we ask ourselves if minnows should be banned against playing the giants in sport. These are questions that seem to hold some degree of validity, but, much like the ill-fated thirty-ninth game and England’s long-awaited second World Cup victory, the sentiment is that these will never happen in our lifetimes.

The argument people put forward is that minnows cause injury to the stars of team sports: Hamilton, Ronaldo, LeBron James, the greats of their respective sports. This is certainly true in some cases. Remember Birmingham City's Martin Taylor who famously broke Eduardo’s leg in a third minute challenge of the Arsenal forward? The club failed to challenge in the Premier League and was ultimately relegated. The list goes on and on. Djibril Cissé was famously injured in a friendly match against China in 2006, who had only featured once in the World Cup in 2001, where they had lost all three of their matches, scored none and conceded nine. In short, they were the whipping boys of that World Cup group. Meanwhile, Cissé missed the whole tournament in Germany due to his broken leg. If he had been playing, he may have taken and scored a penalty in that fateful final ahead of Trezeguet, who famously missed.

However, this view would only lead to sport being dominated by a select few who have either the funding or the resources to prosper at the highest level. Would we be witnessing Southampton's extraordinary second place in the Premier League if the miso-minnows had their way? I doubt it. Furthermore, the minnow is as an essential part to sport as the shark. Every David needs a Goliath. This year’s World Cup was essentially based on that notion, with no team failing to score or gain points in a competitive campaign, despite there being many mismatches in size, wealth and footballing ability between some of the nations. For instance, look at the game between Iran and Argentina. The former have won the AFC Asian Cup three times, the latter have won the World Cup twice and the Copa America a staggering 14 times, yet the Iranian team managed to hold off the best efforts of the best player on the planet for 99% of the match, being undone by a moment of magic in stoppage time. It was not, to paraphrase Brendan Rodgers, a case of “there being two buses parked instead of one", as Iran were solid on the attack and had a strong penalty appeal turned down; they also mustered only one less shot on target than their superior counterparts. Again, observe the incredible rise of Ludogorets Razgrad, who seem to be extremely apt at giant-killing. Note the aggregate win over Lazio in the Europa League and the narrow losses against Liverpool and Real Madrid, both of which they scored in. Finally, note their exceptional draw against Liverpool. To put this into perspective, Anfield’s capacity is 45,276 to Ludogorets’s tiny 8,000, the same size as Bath City’s, a team with plays in the Conference South. What I am trying to relate to you is that today’s minnows are more impressive than the makeshift outfits of yesteryear.

The same goes for international teams. San Marino celebrated their first points in a European Championship qualifier with a 0-0 draw against Estonia, which led the players to celebrate like they had won the World Cup. Moreover, the average number of goals scored against minnows is constantly decreasing. Take the example of Ireland, whom I support internationally, who were trounced by Germany 6-1 in 2012, but managed a 1-1 draw in their last appearance against the World Champions. There are examples everywhere in sport that the continued participation of minnows can aid the sport and, of course, the minnows themselves.
