---
title: Anniversaries
author: William Eustace
---

*“In this article, I am going to write about…”* These are the nine words that no English essay marker wants to read. You may well be instructed, should you have free reign to name your work of art, to write it in such a way that the title sums it up nicely. This article, however, is not about what to do once you have been wed, one unto another, for fifty years. It is not even to describe the sheer joy of a Jubilee; instead, it is about death. Not anyone’s death in particular; just death. Fear it, love it, or loathe it, along with Labour bankrupting the country and tax, it is a certainty.

It came as something of a surprise to me that, recently, we marked the third year since the Fukushima nuclear accident. The International Atomic Energy Agency published a press release at 21:10 GMT on the 11th of March 2011, which — in a mild and understated manner — suggested that there might be a problem at the nuclear power plant, which had been hit by a tsunami earlier that day. Built in the late 1960s, and commissioned in 1971, the reactors were designed by General Electric. Wikipedia — that most elevated and ever-accurate paragon of knowledge, generally reserved and objective — describes the “Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster”. Disaster is a word used frequently, and yet, when you look at the figures, it doesn’t really work. Yes, it has caused a significant loss of livelihood for quite a few people; yes, the radioactivity is expected to produce an increase in cancer rates; yes, the loss in faith in nuclear power could have disastrous consequences in the struggle against the ever-threatening anthropogenic Climate Change. Without expressing an opinion on the latter, yes, it’s a disaster. But is it really a __big__ disaster? There were nearly 20,000 deaths due to the earthquake and following tsunami. After the nuclear accident, 300,000 people were evacuated, of whom 1,600 died (0.5%), for mainly unspecified reasons. If one counts this as a direct consequence of the accident, then, perhaps, it is a disaster. But, apart from around forty injuries from various causes, there have, so far as one can determine, been no __confirmed__ casualties. This is partially because of the rapid evacuation, and partially because it is, essentially, impossible to distinguish a natural cancer from one caused by radiation exposure. The injuries and evacuation deaths are seriously regrettable, and have, rightly, sent shockwaves through Japan’s nuclear industry, but are they due solely to nuclear power? Probably not.

While there was a great fuss in the media this March about the horrific disaster, I have a sneaking, slinking, sullen and sly suspicion that there will be less of a song and dance about an accident which didn’t injure forty people, three years ago, in Japan: it killed somewhere around 25,000 in India thirty years ago this October; many of the survivors continue to suffer now. The plant was operated by Union Carbide India Limited, a spin-off of the large American chemical firm.

Bakelite, the iconic 1920s/30s brand which produced the world’s first synthetic plastic, the snappily named polyoxybenzylmethylenglycolanhydride, was just one of the companies bought out by the wide-ranging Union Carbide Corporation (UCC); by 1984, Union Carbide India Limited (UCIL) was celebrating its 50th birthday, having begun doing business in India in 1934. Among other products, the company made pesticides; Aldicarb and Sevin to name two. Both of these were somewhat revolutionary when they were introduced, in the late fifties, because they were very effective but they did not bioaccumulate. Pesticides had hit the news in 1961, when an explosive (not literally) book called Silent Spring revealed that DDT (then a popular pesticide) was poisoning birds (specifically the eagle) and most other forms of wildlife, so the fact that they didn’t persist for too long in the environment was an advantage. Despite this upside, however, there were risks. Sevin, for instance, is highly toxic, since it inhibits the breakdown of a neurotransmitter called acetylcholine. This results in muscle spasm and if enough is taken, death. Sevin is also believed to be a carcinogen. Of course, pesticides are, by their very nature, toxic to some organisms and there were comparatively few selective ones around at the time. To supply India’s rapidly growing agricultural sector UCIL opened a chemical plant in Bhopal, the capital of Madhya Pradesh, the central region of India, in 1970. It was to produce a large number of different chemicals, one of which was Sevin.

And, until the agricultural depression and droughts of the 1980s reduced the pesticide market, carbaryl (=Sevin) was a ‘nice little earner’ for UCIL and its parent company UCC, but when the demand for pesticide dropped, the unit became less profitable, and staff cuts were implemented. This would have been acceptable, had a similar attitude not been taken to safety: by 1984, the situation in the Sevin plant was not so much hazardous as lethal.

The reason that this particular pesticide was very dangerous to produce was that, under the process used by UCIL, it was made by reacting α-napthol (a reasonably safe, solid powder) and MIC: methyl-isocyanate. MIC is not safe: an incredibly toxic liquid, for which the safety threshold in America is 0.2 parts per million. This, arguably, is true of many process chemicals; what makes MIC especially dangerous though, is that it reacts very exothermically with water. Since it boils at around 40oC, this means that any water reacting with any amount of this liquid will produce an incredibly toxic gas. The obvious solution, to UCIL, was to keep it nice and far away from water. Still, a 1982 UCC safety audit warned of the risk of a runaway reaction in the MIC unit. There is, however, yet another reason why this plant was inherently unsafe: it produced MIC on site (which, since it avoids hazardous goods transport, is good) from two reagants, one of which is somewhat obscure, and the other of which is phosgene. That’s right, the same chemical used to great (if terrible) effect by both sides in the trenches of WWI.

Normally, following good practice, MIC is produced only in small quantities, before being used up immediately down the line. Due to a drop in demand, however, there was rather a lot in a number of underground storage tanks. Still, the plant’s operations had to go on, and, (quite rightly) following the mantra that cleanliness is next to godliness, the operators cleaned out the pipes of the MIC facility on a regular basis. With water. This had been going on for fourteen years, without incident, and the cleaning regime of the 2nd of December 1984 was very nearly the same. The critical error, however, was not to insert a round, steel plate – a slip-blind – in the pipe downstream of the washing operation. The result of this was that when the water arrived at the old, poorly maintained, leaky valves, which may have been stuck open by an obstacle in the pipe, or simply corroded, it went straight through into the MIC tank. As night fell, a powerful, and, by this stage, self-accelerating reaction had begun. The safety alarms for the tank had stopped working in 1980, and the pressure gauge had not been working for a week. Instead of replacing the gauge, the plant operators switched to another tank. The tank refrigeration system, which could have slowed the reaction, was switched off to save electricity, while only one backup monitoring system had been installed, which was manually operated; similar, contemporary systems in the US have four automatic ones. The reason for this? Deliberate use of Indian design consultancies and manufacturing under government guidelines.

At 2300, a worker smelt MIC near the plant, and raised the alarm; this was, worryingly, not that unusual, so no urgent action was taken. As the reaction raged, alarms began to go off. There were two systems which could have saved them (albeit debatably) at this point: the flare tower and the vent scrubber. The first of these has the hazardous chemical which needs to be dumped passed through it and burnt. The second uses sodium hydroxide to neutralise such substances. “Why didn’t they just get rid of it all through those, then?” I hear you cry. Well, the flare tower, like the other safety systems, was offline for ‘maintenance’ at the time, while the vent gas scrubber was not capable of handling the enormous quantity of MIC stored. In short, by 0000, the plant was doomed. Sure enough, the **42,000kg** of cyanide compound reacted with the water, heating itself up and creating hydrogen cyanide gas. By the morning, approximately 30 tonnes of the toxic smog had drifted across Bhopal, killing around 10,000 people within days.

This explanation was made by the Indian Government’s investigation. Both UCC and UCIL investigated and found that the release was due to sabotage by an employee: it seems unlikely that the truth will ever be known for sure.

There is, however, a final irony in this puzzle: in 2008 there was a large explosion at the Bayer CropScience pesticide plant in Institute, West Virginia. Two workers were fatally injured, and around ten people were taken to hospital with potential chemical poisoning. The cause was an improperly operated reaction vessel which ruptured. This isn’t unheard of; what was rather more alarming, though, in a facility quite literally a stone’s throw away from a university and on the outskirts of a major city, was that the fragments of the container struck the protective shielding on a tank containing around 6,000kg of methyl-isocyanate. If the shield had moved and damaged pipes leading out of the tank, which investigators found would have been perfectly possible, it could well be that another pesticide manufacturing MIC release could have occurred. In another accident in 2010, a release of phosgene from a worn transfer hose killed another worker at the same site.

Although, hopefully, this article has not been too boring for you, I implore you, dear reader, to press on: there is, I trust, a moral to the story. In fact, upon a moment’s thought, there are a couple of morals to the story, which I will dredge up, like the recidivistic layabouts that morals can be, from the darkest depths of my pseudo-journalistic mind in a mere few seconds!

When I say “Bhopal”, people are flummoxed, discombobulated, confused: if I offered them a free holiday to the place, they might well say ‘Please!’  Imagine how different the reaction might be, however, if I offered a free holiday to Chernobyl. Admittedly, the Ukraine is rather less sunny than central India (although in a few months it will be the monsoon season) but that isn’t really the reason: who in their right minds would go to Chernobyl? It’s full of mutated bats and video game monsters and people with six arms and no legs, isn’t it? Ghastly! Horrible! Frightful! That said, I would rather like to go to Chernobyl: the scene of the world’s worst nuclear disaster is, I understand, a fascinating place. That said, I might leave it thirty or forty years for … certain personal reasons.

The fame of Chernobyl could be seen, for those devotees of the series, on Jeremy Clarkson’s bespectacled face, when he was ‘informed’ (I suspect not for the first time) that he was to travel to Chernobyl, in the safety and security of a VW Up! The Chernobyl accident (**disaster**) will live on in human memory, probably (hopefully?) as long as the radioactive waste, which has a half-life of more than 200,000 years. The Bhopal disaster also caused extensive contamination; the abandoned plant leaks mercury and many toxic chemicals into the soil, and groundwater contamination is believed to be widespread and serious. Yet, I suspect, remarkably few people in Britain will be remembering those killed in India in 1984 this December.

This article has relied extensively on adages, sayings and odd phrases, so here’s another, often used in the aviation industry: an accident occurs when all the holes in the Swiss cheese line up. All of the accidents listed above have happened because things have slipped through the gaps. Does this mean that nuclear power and large scale chemical manufacture, really only examples, should be abandoned? Of course not: the past should not be used as a tool to bar progress, but instead historic tragedies, like these, should be used to reform the way in which processes are managed. To name one example, Bayer CropScience no longer uses MIC in West Virginia (or at all, now): it makes the same pesticide using an inherently safer process. Safety in the nuclear industry has been improved by Chernobyl, and poor locations like Fukushima need never again be chosen; only a Luddite would seek to drag down progress in the field. So, as Albert Einstein (allegedly) once said: “Life is like riding a bicycle. To keep your balance you must keep moving.”
