---
title: The Ramon Menon Column
author: Ramon Menon
---

*Up and coming politician Ramon Menon, often seen preaching his (questionable) political views to 4th formers in the atrium, gives you an insight to his political theory.*

David Cameron. Tory. Etonian. Bullingdon Club T***. Nick Clegg. Don’t get me started.

2010 was a special year in British Politics. Two parties on completely different political spectrums forming a government. Failure was a certainty; just how long the public would realise it would become a failure was the only thing that required any actual thought.

The EU despises Cameron and his own eurosceptic backbenchers loathe him even more. It’s so blatant. Utterly humiliated by fellow EU leaders when he tried to push Jean Claude Juncker out of the EU’s best-paid position, a man that would eventually be paid more than the US Commander in Chief; to be more precise a hefty £1.8 million with perks included in that. Then he received a backlash from his own MP’s and UKIP for not doing enough to make sure Juncker did not become the President of the EU Commision. Support for the man was deteriorating. Two of his MP’s have defected to a party he described as “a bunch of fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists” and one of those MP’s has already gained a seat in the House of Commons, signalling the first ever UKIPer to do so. His handling of the Scottish Referendum, Syria and IS will prove to be the final blow for him and the Tories.

His policy in Syria is just mindblowing. For the last 30 years British Foreign Policy towards the Middle East has been completely hypocritical and just very carelessly thought through. Clearly history lessons at Eton weren’t a strong point during Cameron’s time as he still thinks that throwing bombs at something is the only one solution to everything in that region of the planet. Although, Iraq, Iran and the Gulf Wars had nothing to do with him, he has shown mesmerizingly poor leadership throughout the duration of Syrian Civil War. Two British hostages have been brutally murdered by IS (this could soon increase due to his incompetence) while at the same time Turkey managed to negotiate the release of 49 of its citizens WITHOUT any payment of any sort. Serious questions should be asked when another country can negotiate the release of its citizens without money being involved, yet we can’t.

Moreover, the way Cameron handled the Scottish Referendum made him inferior to Alex Salmond. Cameron let Salmond tweak the question of the referendum even though he had the legitimate powers in Westminster to make sure that could not happen. Salmond always wanted to be on a campaign sided YES, increasing the positivity of his campaign; and Cameron literally gifted this to him on a plate. He could have made sure that the question was something along the lines of “Should Scotland remain a part of Great Britain”. Salmond would have immediately been on the backfoot and the referendum might have had a more definite result to it, rather than the unnecessary uncertainty that eventually forced Cameron and the other parties in Westminster to throw the kitchen sink at the Scots and plead them to stay with all these unrealistic promises of devo-max thrown at them. 
