---
title: Jihadi John
author: Ramon Menon
---

It frustrates me hearing the pseudonym of Mohammed Enwazi, “Jihadi John”. Apparently he is part of some scum group in ISIS who nickname themselves as The Beatles but I mean please, aren’t we ruining the name of the legend that is John Lennon every time we call Enwazi Jihadi John? It sounds incredibly childish and peculiar to call him Jihadi John considering his actions are less childish but more just plain outrageous. It also raises the question of what do we do with people who preach non-violent extremism in university campuses as this man once did and what to do with individuals who go abroad fighting in Syria regardless of the nature of the which side they are on.

Firstly, the fact that Enwazi was able to preach his disturbing views at the University of Westminster beggars belief brings into question the government’s role in allowing this.
The government have so far clarified that it is illegal for people to preach extremism of a violent nature but have said that anyone can preach non-violent extremism wherever they want to do so. I think that they are right, due to the fact that people have the right to freedom of speech. I am however convinced that we should also do a Nick Griffin: put these people such as Anjem Choudhry on platforms such as Question Time, let him get ripped into by other panellists and members of the general public and after that let their followers contemplate as to whether following their so called idols is actually a decent thing to do. The BNP’s support has plummeted after Nick Griffin was bashed on Question Time, so let’s do the same thing to these other people whether they be Islamists or not.

Furthermore, it is about time that we took a hard line on people who intend to travel or go to countries like Syria fighting for terrorists groups. Whether it be the PKK (a terrorist Kurdish group) or ISIS, they should have harsh punishments inflicted on them. I simply disagree with those charities which say that Enwazi is a victim and frankly, they need to have their statuses rechecked. We cannot blame MI5 and the secret services for failing to monitor such individuals. This rotten Tory/Liberal coalition has pledged to ring fence foreign aid spending at the expense of the police/secret service budget thereby severely limiting the ability of the aforementioned services to monitor every possible dangerous person. I say that we increase their budget and slash foreign aid in order that we can protect people at home rather than blaming the Secret Services for everything when it’s not even their fault. The NHS spends more in one week than  MI5 spends in one year which demonstrates just how tiny their budget is.

I think we should follow Australia and remove the citizenships or passports of the people who fight for terrorists groups be they in Syria or Timbuktu. Obviously we have an infuriating obstacle manifested in the European Court of Human Rights; I say we should screw them and the loony lefties who think that their human rights will be impinged on if we make them stateless. After all we ignored them regarding prisoners’ rights to vote so let’s do the same here. Honestly, they have betrayed their country by fighting for terrorists groups who aim to cause damage to the UK, therefore I see no problem in having their citizenships reviewed/withdrawn.
