---
title: "The New Anti-Semitism?"
author: "Jake O'Keeffe & Theo Anton"
---

A columnist at a major UK national newspaper labels the whole people of one nation ‘a community of child murderers’. The article is published. What one nation could be made up solely of child murderers? Even for countries with reprehensible government regimes, such as North Korea, Syria or Turkmenistan, no one is suggesting, and quite rightly, that the whole populace, the common citizens, are all ‘child murderers’. Of course, the nation in question is Israel, the Jewish state. For the people who once faced accusations that they ate Gentile babies for the Seder dinner every Passover, this statement is not only unfair, but also a chilling reminder of a dark past. Hatred and suspicion of Jews, whether openly or veiled under criticism of Israel, has made an unwelcome return to the mainstream.

Since Israel withdrew from Gaza nine years ago, it seems to have been strongly criticised by everyone from the media to national leaders. People who have closeted any anti-Semitic views in the past have been able to express these opinions from the safety of their homes through social media. The level of anti-Semitism on YouTube for example is shocking – commentators quote The Protocol of the Elders of Zion and claim to have inside information on a ‘Zionist plot’ which plans to take over the world. Yes, seriously. In the 21st century. The same old lies about the Jewish people, with the word ‘Zionist’ simply inserted to replace ‘Jews’; attempting to use linguistic alteration to make the same statement no longer racist.

Just two weeks before the publishing of this article, a terrorist attack occurred, as surely all readers are aware, on a synagogue in the Har Nof neighbourhood of West Jerusalem. This was an act of terror, an attack on the symbol of Jewish communities for thousands of years. How ironic it is that one of the main aims of the foundation of Israel and of the Zionist movement as whole was to ensure that Jews would finally have a place where they could pray in peace.  Now it appears that security is just as necessary outside synagogues in Israel as it is in Britain, or France, where foolish, racist young people, inspired by the "comedian" Dieudonné, have taken to the habit of demonstrating the 'quenelle' gesture outside synagogues. Let us also remember that the Har Nof attack happened not in East Jerusalem or in the occupied territories of the West Bank, but inside Israel's borders. An attack not on radical Zionism, but on Judaism. Not a political protest, but a hate crime. The images of holy scriptures drenched in blood demonstrate that.

Of course, it is no surprise that along with the absolutely correct unequivocal condemnation issued by the vast majority of political leaders against this awful crime, come a not insignificant group of voices claiming that it was a reaction to Israeli aggression, particularly concerning Al-Aqsa (Temple Mount). In Gaza, sweets were handed out in celebration, while the Jordanian government held a ten minute silence for the deaths of the attackers, as reported by the Algemeiner. Baroness Warsi, former chair of the Conservatives and former cabinet Minister, tweeted just two hours after the Har Nof attack that 'Israeli extremists storm Al Aqsa & intimidate worshippers; Palestinian extremists storm synagogue & kill 4 worshippers'. The implication that terrorism can ever be justified is reprehensible. It is true that messianic Israeli extremists do exist, and they act with unacceptable aggression - but the worshippers killed at the synagogue were not extremists, not inciteful. They were Jews and they were murdered.

It is not anti-Semitic to criticise Israel; let us make that clear. Let us also make it clear however, that much criticism of Israel is motivated by dislike and distrust of Jews. In 2013 the U.N. General Assembly adopted a total of 21 resolutions singling out Israel for criticism — and 4 resolutions on the rest of the world combined. The four that did not concern Israel were one on Syria, a regime that has murdered 150,000 of its own people, and one each on Iran, North Korea and Myanmar. There were zero UNGA resolutions on systematic abuses committed by China, Egypt, Pakistan, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, or Zimbabwe. Even for the strongest critic of Israeli military actions this would surely seem way out of proportion - especially given that Israel lives with Hamas and the al-Nusra Front on its doorstep. Both call not only for the destruction of the Jewish state, but for the extermination of all Jews, saying they will not rest until this occurs. These groups aren't freedom fighters, they're terrorists.

Anti-semitism is a very real problem, and it is not going away; in fact, it is doing the opposite and gathering significant momentum. Nor it is limited to the Arabic-speaking world: in the past year there have been multiple attacks on Jews- in France a gunman entered the Jewish Museum in Brussels and shot four people dead, and the CST, an organisation committed to maintaining the safety of British Jews, reported a 400% rise in anti-Semitic incidents following Operation Protective Edge. This is a terribly sad situation, a repetition of a past which we all thought Europe was over. So when you make a 'political' judgement on Israel, please consider whether it is really just that, or whether there is a likely undercurrent of stereotyping and hatred - because you are probably not an anti-Semite, but if you make a comment that could possibly be said by an anti-Semite, or could make Jews feel unsafe or threatened, then realise that you are part of the problem. A problem that could be quite easily eradicated. But with the way things are currently going, the problem will remain.
