---
title: "Unleashing India’s Full Potential"
author: "James Cole"
banner: rocket.jpg
light: light
---

When India’s Mangalyaan rocket arrived in orbit of Mars on the 24th September, you would have been a hard man not to revel in the nation’s excitement. It’s not hard to imagine the scenes of jubilation in Bangalore’s mission control as hundreds of excited engineers gawked at huge state of the art screens and cheered as the rocket completed its 670 million kilometre journey. For a first attempt, this is an amazing feat for India, especially when considering a nation whose space program has previously lagged behind those of its Asian rivals in recent years. This is just one of many international achievements to emerge from Bangalore over the past few months. The technology capital of India is home to the country’s very own Silicon Valley, playing host to all the major western I.T. firms from Hewlett Packard to Google as well as an impressive array of home-grown corporations.

The success doesn’t stop there. Owner of a £10.2 billion fortune, Indian steel giant Lakshmi Mittal almost tops London’s rich list. CEO of the world’s largest steelmaker, Mittal’s humble success story from owner of a small, family run steel firm to mega-fortune provides us with living proof that anything can be achieved in this exciting country. Sadly Mittal’s story is a rare anomaly.

Let me instead transport you to London’s National Theatre on a brisk November evening. A boy, no more than 16, squats on the stage, his hands rapidly sifting through a mound of plastic bottles, chocolate wrappers, cardboard boxes – the list could go on. Behind him stands a dilapidated line of corrugated iron shacks, tended to by a motley array of characters, ranging from a black market metal dealer to a one legged prostitute. Set in the Annawadi slum on the outskirts of Mumbai’s International airport, David Hare’s play based on the award winning novel Behind the Beautiful Forevers by Catherine Boo couldn’t depict a better contrast between India’s technology savvy mega-rich and the 360 million people living below the poverty line. As planes screech in overhead and tourists lounge by the pool in their five star hotels, less than 500m away lies one of the largest slums in the world, home to an estimated 750,000 people. The £45 million space program in Bangalore couldn’t feel further away.

The inequality is astounding. How can one country play host to some of the world’s wealthiest billionaires yet be home to the highest number of poor people in the world? To make matters worse, inequality in the country has in fact risen in the past few decades. A recent OECD report estimated that the ratio between India’s top end and bottom end wage earners has more than doubled since the early 1990s. This factor alone has been outlined as one of the primary reasons for India’s stunted economic growth over the same period. Whereas the new millennium has seen China emerge as the world’s economic superpower, India’s growth has been substantial but disappointing in relation to that of its larger Asian rival. India’s underinvestment in both healthcare and education has proved to be a glaring miscalculation. Evidence of this can be shown by India’s poor adult literacy rate, a meagre 76% in contrast to China’s 95%. Despite having a vast population, India’s economic growth has been poorly supported by high quality human capital.

Of course inequality cannot be the only factor to blame. India’s messy form of governance where corruption and social upheaval is rife does not lend itself to international triumph. Just five heart racing minutes on one of the country’s chaotic roads will lead you to doubt whether this nation can ever break into the developed world. Although endearing and at times hilarious to the curious tourist, India’s disorder and bustling pandemonium has certainly put the brakes on the country's burgeoning economy.

This may be about to change. During his election speech in May, Narenda Modi outlined his proposal for the creation of a new India. The construction of a hundred new cities, a nationwide high speed rail network and an environmental cleanup of the Ganges River were all top of the agenda. Driving through the outskirts of Delhi, it’s not hard to notice the effect. Cranes towering above the skeletons of high rise buildings are scattered across the skyline, a rapid expansion to house the nation’s next generation of wealthy individuals. We can only cross our fingers and hope that they will allow this country to unleash its full potential.
