---
title: "Three Wolves and a Moon"
author: "Toby Lowenstein &amp; Alex Gresty"
banner: three-wolves.jpg
light: light
---

“I have seen many t-shirts in my time - almost five - but none have inspired me in quite the same way.”

We were first sceptical in our ignorance having heard of the tales of the famous ‘Three Wolves and a Moon Tee’. That was until we saw it.

‘Twas a dreary Monday night in Luton. The dark was terrifying. Engulfing. Another unsuccessful night out on the town and all hope was lost. Rain sodden and weary of further rejection we trudged to Bersheeba’s Kebabs to drown our sorrows with the sweet taste of undercooked lamb. SUDDENLY HE CAME TO US. Like a shepherd in the field, like a plumber in the water closet, like an artisan bread maker finishing the late shift at Tescos. The point we’re trying to make is this man was our Khaleesi. Our Gus. OUR JAMAL!

Draped with a cloak of stunning women, we immediately recognised him as everything we aspired to be in life. He had an aura about him - an air of power and overwhelming knowledge. Yet there was something more. Something particular. Something drawing us to the man. How was he doing it?! These women seemed glued to him and let's just say he wasn't blessed on the looks front (think Gollum). Munching on our Çöp Şiş we knew we couldn't allow this opportunity to slip. What drew us to him? What drew everyone to him, you may ask? It was a howl. The battle cry of a wolf. Now two, then three! The unison of three terrible wolves howling to us, beckoning us. Suddenly it became blindingly clear. What drew everyone to this demi-god, was his glorious Tee. We swiftly sidled up to our Messiah, drenched with nervous, salty sweat. Fortunately, the man was clearly rather beveraged and could be seen to be in the ‘friendly’ stage of drunk. After offering us something that sounded like ‘mehth’ (we told him no, as he didn’t have any teeth), the man informed us he’d ordered this fine garment off Amazon the previous week and since then life hadn’t been the same. He claimed it had some kind of magic power. We had to see for ourselves.

On the verge of chundering from the shock of a lack of exposure to exercise, we crashed through the doors of Khan’s internet cafe. Hot and sweaty, we began furiously hitting the keys to place an order, there was not a moment to lose. 'There must be mediums left! There must be!'

There were.

We powered through the rest of the order like men possessed with the spirit of men really trying to order something quickly. Whipping out our debit cards we were suddenly struck cold by the realisation that our fickle plastic friends were at their limits. Trawling through our wallets, the best we further seemed capable of producing was an expired Oyster, a semi-filled-in Caffè Nero redeemable coffee card, and a Nandos credit card (and we can assure you there are likely Albanian shell suit merchants with more money than could be found there). A final attempt only produced an M&S Premium Clubcard in the name of Mr Ramon Menon. Very odd. What was going on? Did God hate us? Why were we being presented with such majesty, only to have its miniature form mock us on a screen, with no hope of ever securing ones of our very own? We were running out of options like Mr Menon was running out of opportunities for discounted women’s lingerie. Then we remembered; our savings! We could prise the cash from there and still have enough to buy a small doughnut in 2017, interest rates permitting. Result! We hit the last few buttons like insolent children. Finally, it was done. And then came the wait...

Four days passed. Five. Six. Seven. There must be a problem. It had been far too long. The second Tee-less week came around like an unwanted relative. We couldn't eat. We couldn’t sleep. Then! The soft chime of the doorbell. Stumbling over uneaten takeaways we flung open the door. Once the postman had finished soiling himself, he gingerly handed over the glowing package (whilst admirably trying his very hardest not to empty the contents of his trousers onto the doorstep). Tearing away at the wrapping like hamsters on heat, we revealed the holy relics. Each was adorned with not one, not two, but three wolves! And a moon!

We have never looked back. A warning must come with this review: this Tee will change you... Once shy and unsuccessful, this 100% cotton-based majesty has transformed us into magnets, attracting members of the opposite sex to an unsettling degree (almost two women have been snared by its holy radiance over the past summer alone!). We no longer need to wear anything else. Literally. Sure, we have been arrested in several high-street shops and are now banned in most major bedding and furniture stores but, dear reader, if you choose to embrace nothing else in this life, embrace this Tee. If you too choose to bear the masterpiece upon your unworthy chest then womenfolk might gaze upon you and say “Oooh”. If not, however, small children will laugh at you, you will be denied access to most minor kebab and sandwich  outlets and will most certainly be refused entry to Butlins.

On a final and sincere note, we implore you to purchase [one of these Tees](http://www.amazon.com/The-Mountain-Three-Short-Sleeve/dp/B002HJ377A).
