---
title: "Menswear: Why You Should Care About It"
author: Albert Meek
---

St Paul's. Truly the fashion epicentre of North Barnes. Between the burgundy trousers and the floral ties, it's a wonder Teen Vogue hasn't done a spread on us already. Despite, however, the effortless and refined beauty of each of the ’JP Morgan internship’ ensembles that grace the atrium each morning, I am sure the fact that London Fashion Week was held last month in the capital passed at least 95% of you by. The other 5% percent probably know me, and therefore have had it plastered across social media and daily conversation.

In fairness, there is very little reason for any of you to care, or even notice, this international event. I for one am going to put up my hand and say that I do not follow the daily goings on of the New York Stock Exchange. Or football. That being said, the fashion industry is worth £26 billion to the UK economy, and £1.5 trillion worldwide, so I felt it was necessary to at least provide a basic outline as to how the 'seasons' work.

The biggest companies, the veritable powers that be that dictate what all of us are wearing, display high fashion collections biannually, in four of the global fashion hotspots: Milan, New York, Paris and London. These are the clothes that nobody actually wears. They’re like concept art. Only ridiculously expensive and time consuming to make. Then all of the smaller companies go off and make cheaper and more sane versions of the same styles, which is what the general public wears three months later. Clothes that we wear in Autumn and Winter (AW collections) are ‘exhibited’ in the summer time, and vice versa. Again, weird. So really you need to start planning what you are going to wear next summer over the coming three months.

So why do should you care about these events that occur to satisfy nothing apart from a complex materialistic drive in life? Money, as per the norm, is a key factor. If you ended up as the CEO of Kering, for example, which is a terrifyingly large company that owns Gucci, Saint Laurent Paris, Balenciaga, Puma, Alexander McQueen and about 15 other major international subsidiaries, you would be very rich. Like really rich. We are talking a personal fortune of over $15 billion. Life goals.

However, let’s say that there is a chance that you don't want to become this wealthy. To ascend to the god-like status of 67th on the Forbes billionaire list. Let's say that you want to bypass this and head towards number one, a place I'm sure is in the sights of a few Paulines, and factors heavily into their 'where do I see myself in 15 years' time’ plan. Fair  enough. If that's the case then fashion is probably not the most important thing on your list right now. It's probably not going to earn you the most money either, seeing as Louis Vuitton (the most successful luxury brand, with an estimated value of $28.4 billion) seems pitiful when compared to Apple, which has a value of over $104 billion (Forbes). However, whilst on the move to your ’rightful place’ (to quote Douglass Booth in The Riot Club), it's probably better to look on trend, rather than sticking to the guidelines of Dress For Success, which is a book dictating that you have to wear a grey, blue or beige suit at all times, unless you are in charge. If you are in charge, then you need to base your entire wardrobe around pinstripes.*

So now everyone is wearing black, blue and brown. But obviously this will not suffice if you are us. We need to look like the epitome of success, and to do this we need to keep up with the trends. The trends of late, for this AW season at least, were shown back in June, but they're now starting to appear in shops, as slightly toned down versions of the creations seen on the catwalk. The basic understanding is that oversized is going to be big (aha) this winter, so we all need to go Macklemore-esque with the fur coats and the massive jumpers. A good example of this: Dolce and Gabbana's line of outfits that look like something from Game of Thrones. I think going all the way and also donning the golden crown really lets people know where you're going in life.

\* This did in fact lead to the decline of several fabric mills across Europe after the financial crisis started in 2008, because pinstripes went out of fashion, in a big way (clue: it's because no one wanted to look like a banker and get heckled and/or stabbed whilst walking down the street.)
