---
title: "Molly Sims was right…"
author: Josh Goldstein
---

Since 2005, more than 5,000 people have given their lives for the sake of the continuing conflict between Gaza and Israel, in what is now arguably the focal point of the wider Israeli-Palestinian struggle. In 2014, fighting intensified between Israel and Hamas, and this latest escalation of rocket-fire and gun-fighting has proven far more deadly than the previous Gaza War of 2008-2009. However, for those seeking to understand it there is a disturbing lack of informative, impartial journalism.

People around the globe know, of course, that there is a conflict ongoing. It is undoubtedly a topic about which many different people hold many different views. This is positive: without diversity of opinion, the world would be a far more tedious place. However, a grave problem here is the lack of educated, neutral reporting on the subject. The best way for people to learn and formulate opinions about regional conflict is to read up-to-date articles and essays; in this instance, though, finding any unbiased piece is worryingly difficult.
The U.S Government, arguably the most powerful body in the World, is often accused of being too pro-Israel. These people point to the billions of dollars given to the Jewish state by America since 1985, and the efforts of George W. Bush to provide Israel with the constant help of his nation throughout the Second Intifada of 2000-2005. The US, of course, has geopolitical interests in nurturing and supporting a loyal ally in one of the World’s most unstable areas.

The view that news corporations are biased is also widely vocalised. For example, the BBC is often touted as being overly pro-Palestine and, in a surprising development earlier this year, was even criticised by some as being too biased towards Israel! The problem, though, does not end with governments and world-wide broadcasting companies. The devastating, knock-on effects that their biases can invoke are a stark reminder of their hold over popular opinion.  

A current viral Facebook page, ‘The TRUTH about Israel’, recently posted a picture about the horrific murder of the four rabbis in a synagogue in Har Nof, an observant, Jewish part of Jerusalem. The caption denounced the ‘“Palestinian” people for celebrating this act’ - and this highlights the problem. Not only is the use of inverted commas to refer to Palestine very patronising, the post is actually quite misleading, claiming that the 'Palestinian people' celebrated this, when in fact only a very small minority of Palestinians are likely to have in any way defended this terrible act of terror. As a result, the approximately 100,000 people who subscribe to this page on Facebook are likely to have a distorted image of both what happened in this specific instance, and of the wider response of most Palestinians. Comments soon began to appear such as ‘The devil has its own religion… ISLAM!’. This kind of malignant, ignorant viewpoint then circulated globally through articles and blogs; quoting and accentuating these falsehoods and warped realities. The Palestinian murderers were shouting ‘Allahu Akbar’ as they carried out the anti-Semitic attack – but the vast majority of Muslims around the World would never think of doing anything that resembled such actions.

The problem is, the facts are often forgotten in regards to this conflict, and individuals’ opinions dominate articles, essays and TV reports about it. The consequences of this are appallingly apparent today, with a great many people holding wildly extremist views. Strong opinions are one thing, but when these commentators do not have the evidence – as a result of low-quality journalism - to justify their views, it becomes an altogether more dangerous prospect. People, simply through opening a newspaper, may have their ideas about the Middle East skewed by the apparent gravitas of the misleading words that they find there.

As the great, philosophical-debate-loving Molly Sims, swimwear model for ‘Sports Illustrated’, supposedly once said: ‘do not believe everything you read.’
