---
title: "WW1: What OCR Won’t Tell You"
author: J Robine
---

> "And still, the heroic, grand impression given by this endless passage of death uplifts and strengthens us survivors. As strange as it may sound, here you become reacquainted with ideals, the total devotion to an ideal right up to the gruesome death in battle."

Few modern Brits will be able to read the above passage, from Ernst Junger’s diary, without sprouting an allergic rash. The war was grim, pointless, its victories made ‘unmitigated disasters’ by the numbers of casualties and its conclusion ‘failing to please anybody’. David Pizarro warns, in his The Strange Politics of Disgust, of the use of textures, odours and onomatopoeia in political discourse, for these will be the surest signs of groupthink, indoctrination and rabble-rousing. Nowhere is this vivid and academically dodgy method of narration more exuberant than in modern British portrayals of trench warfare. Slimy mud, stinking with the turds of dead cows, that slithers into beds and boots, the mother of degenerating and putrid diseases. Noxious gases, yellow and green, that fly like death’s silent scythe to hack lungs to aching mush by the thousands. Invisible, unknown chemicals present in normal weaponry that infiltrate one’s brains rusting the strongest steel nerves. For OCR, the only way to make WW1 intelligible for the academic as opposed to the tragic poet is to draw the student’s attention towards the boring banalities of the home front, of food rationing and press censoring. Academics are prone to believing that the sheer horror of the war, without precedents both in futility and awfulness of conditions, gave   the West its taste for peace.

Yet, there are wars occurring every decade in New Guinea that outstrip WW1 in percentage demographic costs to a given society, as demonstrated by Jared Diamond in The World Before Yesterday. Humanity has existed for, shall we say, 100,000 years, a rough estimate given the unsatisfying definitions oftribes like what we now see in New Guinea, killing about 6-10% of their neighbours every 20-50 years Homo Sapiens; for at least 90,000 of these, states did not exist, what existed instead were . War has always involved disgusting conditions- consider the horrors of siege warfare, or the conditions onboard a ship-of-the-line, or a Napoleonic soldier in 1812 Russia, or the consequences of facing a Mongol Horde. Mud, disease, extreme weather, and mental disorders are well-recorded components of all warfare.

Yet there’s something different about our attitude to WW1. A soldier at Towton, bathed in sweat and grime, having lost a leg and an eye, still had the courage to grab the blade of his own sword in an attempt to thrust it into an enemy, skeleton records show. A soldier at Stamford Bridge was quite ready to throw himself into the river knowing that his axe would fall on the logs holding the bridge up. And these heroic actions are the foundations of civilisations. Why is it that the first world war spooked us into disregarding human heroism and complaining meekly about costs?

The long term answer is, of course, that our ideologies were already pointing towards a certain cowardice as Venner would call it, forsaking moral values for economic ones, forsaking the raison-d’etre for longevity; the war catalysed a change in society, it didn’t cause it. That accounts for a general grimness in western memory, but it doesn’t tell us why the British are horrified at the very mention of the war whilst Frenchmen and perhaps Germans too have mixed feelings.

The nature of British warfare since the renaissance has been thalassocratic. Avoid any fight unless the enemy is wielding spears, and, where you can’t fight your way to dominion, pay your way to dominion. Pay the Iroquois to fight against the French and the Dutch to rebel against Spain, pay for Austria to be rebuilt three times after being stormed by France and ensure Venice and Turin’s continued existence as bourgeois hubs. Britain had almost never used its own soldiers, preferring to call in the debts owed by ‘allies’; the one exception, the Waterloo campaign (Marlborough’s campaigns, and the Spanish campaign, are arguably lesser examples) is the only battle all Brits can name. The other part of Britain’s attitude to Europe was divide- and- rule; ensure that no single continental empire rises to prominence. This usually meant separating France and Spain, for four hundred years that’s what it was; ensuring, by marrying Spanish and Italian heiresses at intervals, that a new Carolingian empire could not rise from a Bourbon dynasty. How confusing, then, for the British psyche, to be fighting its own war; and, what’s more, to be fighting it against a Germanic power. This, rather than a superficial ‘pointlessness’, seems to me at the roots of British qualms. The French suffered quite as much, and the Germans suffered more; but we both believed ourselves to be the heirs of Charlemagne, to us the war was not of pure trade interests and power but of who would create the next Holy Roman Empire, a truly united European Union. Whereas the British remember the Somme as a victory but a great cost, the French remember Verdun as a great but costly victory, because it was attributed to the splitting of Lotharingia and the dissolving of the Holy Roman Empire, and its conquest could only mean for us the return of Charlemagne.

And this is where the second problem of OCR becomes apparent; it refuses to teach the truth about the Treaty of Versailles. Seen through the ideological prism detailed above, you realise that the truth has no place for Wilson as an ‘idealist’ or Clemenceau as a ‘tiger’ wanting ‘reparations money’. America, having inherited British trade-based imperialism, held, as Britain did, that Europe had to be kept dissolved among borders which no one found culturally satisfying. The maintaining of the Prussian state was therefore imperative, as a counterbalance to France; it must continue to be protestant, and economically dependent on America so as to be made something of a satellite state. These are not my words, they are Wilson’s in a letter to a colonel in the American army, a close friend of his from Princeton’s. Similar records give backing to what OCR decries as a ‘myth’, the stab-in-the-back story. There were letters sent to German diplomats from the White House, telling Germany to surrender when America entered the war, in return for a fair treatment in the treaty. Germany could have fought for much, much longer than it did. Using its weight as the creditor, America was able to keep Europe more divided than ever it had been, to dissect the Ottoman Empire in a way that still provokes war after war, and to gain a satellite state in Germany. Why? As Molnar tells us in his L’Americanologie, ‘America is not Europe, its structures, its nature and its methods are as alien to us as China’. To be is the negation of being. To be able to press its ideological and trade interests in Europe, Europe must cease to dream of its own culture.

So why does OCR tell us the story of the vile trenches, the saviour America, and the dreamer Wilson? Loosely put, that’s what they’re paid for. In an age where truth is for sale, written not by ascetic monks or idealist governments but middle class businessmen seeking a way to the economic top, your education, what you read in the papers, and everything you have been exposed to has trade interests behind it. Is it so hard to look at courage that denies pleasure, at an ideal found at the bottom of a trench where nothing but the strongest will can find meaning, and approve?
