---
title: "Why Get Off at St Hilda's"
author: "Uday Maudgill"
---

Often, while sitting in the 419 bus, heading to school, I wonder “Why on earth do Paulines get off at the zebra crossing by St. Hilda’s gate, rather than right by the school entrance, where the Coletines get off”. Now, because I have far too many free periods, I have written an article about it.
When I asked a friend why he got off at St. Hilda’s, he said it was “faster, and more efficient”. Unfortunately for him, the numbers don’t really ride it out. If you get off at the St. Hilda’s entrance (or SHE for short), you have to walk ~350m to get to the entry point NOFOB. Assuming you’re late for tutors, and pacing it in at 85m/minute, that’s about 4 mins 30 seconds. By contrast, the relatively short ~180m to walk from the Colet Court Entrance (CCE), takes a far shorter 2 minutes. Even factoring in the 30 seconds or so it takes the bus to get from SHE to CCE, that’s a time-saving of 2 minutes, not to be sniffed at when its 8.37, and registration is closing.

Perhaps Paulines get off at SHE because the route is more unencumbered, and picturesque? Again, this isn’t true. The SHE route forces you to walk past the strange pipe spewing fag smoke into the air, and has a fob-locked door. If you’re one of the 99.9% of Paulines who doesn’t own a fob, you have to stand awkwardly by the gate, until someone comes along to let you in, or pretend to fumble around in your bag, and pretend you had one all along. On the SHE route however, you can skip gaily past the grand trees that line the path, wave to Jamal, our very own lunch hall assistant cum security guard, and get inside with the minimum of bother.

No, I think the answer lies somewhere else. You see, in 2012 (when cookies were four to a pound and there was a river of sludge in the dining hall) the school started its building works. For a whole year, the front of the school was gated off for building works, and the CCE entrance was unusable. In that time, Paulines started using the other entrance exclusively. Now, it is so ingrained in our routines, we cease to think about the merits of getting off where we do. I have even seen Coletines totter off the bus to walk the long way up, because of peer pressure. However much we like to think of ourselves as rational and intelligent, this entrenched habit shows us up to be as herd-orientated as everyone else. So Paulines, I urge you to get off the 419 later. Be proud to go against the grain, assured in the knowledge that your route is the most efficient. For my next piece, look out for a detailed critique of why Paulines get off at Hammersmith bridge road station, rather than the bus station.
