---
title: "How to Create the Perfect Young Enterprise Team"
author: "Milo Mahon and Alex Osmond"
---

For those as yet unexposed to the self indulgent (although highly revealing) process and competition that is ‘Young Enterprise,’ we are of course referring to the ‘only opportunity for under 18s to start and run your own business.’ It is something you have the option of doing in the L8th and will almost certainly jump at the chance to do… It will take you around six to seven weeks after crashing out with your product of inevitable mediocrity to realise just how much the process brought out the inner bellend within you. To truly examine the process and all its flaws we feel it is appropriate to have a look at every aspect of building your ‘perfect’ YE team, a toxic cocktail of sickening superficiality and delusional ‘leaders’.

## Team Name

Before even choosing your product, your team needs a name under which you can make your ‘billions’. This is in fact far more important than the product itself for no apparent reason - it is apparently vital that you establish a team name that imparts some intangible idea of strength, determination and power. The underlying theme to most names is that they don’t actually mean anything at all. Names such as ‘Proteus’ or 'bopo' go down a treat, although it’s highly unlikely that the product involves an early sea god of rivers and oceans in Greek mythology that can be seen in the works of Homer nor the Urban Dictionary definition of BOPO. These are just two examples of names from the past and I feel you can see the general gist of the team names: they are either ‘ancient sounding words’ (‘Optimus’ being another popular choice) or the simple joining of 2 syllables that are easy to say. Another route that one may desire to go down is the deletion of any vowels in the team name, a seemingly vogue thing to do. The idea that the random deletion of vowels will make your name seem ‘sleek’ and ‘modern’ is very prevalent here. Examples of this may include the removing of the ‘E’ ‘A’ and then the second ‘E’ or the word Speaker, to create the infinitely more marketable ‘SPKR.’

## Idea

Think of two relatively distant concepts. Using the powers of enterprise, combine the two, and however awful the bastard half-caste that pops out at the end is, use it as your final product. This line of reasoning is the one that many YE teams take.

One team decided that pillows and pencil cases had been apart for far too long, and like a forceful dullard trying to stuff a square peg into a round hole, they took to their task with persistent energy and intrepid invention. Their heinous brainchild limped out of conception and into reality as the aberrant proof of an unholy matrimony. It fails in everything it set out to achieve, worse than a pencil case and far, far worse than a pillow. It is about as comfortable to rest your head on as a constantly exploding nail bomb due to the pencils and pens that spear your head, and in any case, why in the world would anyone ever need a pencil case that doubled as a pillow? Clearly you can get away with anything here, so go wild, and for the rest of us at least make the kooky combination interesting. Another group tackled the ever pertinent issue of when one misplaces his computer mouse, deciding to merge, as if in the furnace of business mordor, the phone and mouse.  It is in this way that your team shall bring Darwin’s fine theory of natural selection to all products that no longer warrant a place in our markets; stone age and certainly defunct utensils such as the ‘fork’ shall be combined with the equally inaccessible and impractical ‘gloves’ to break dawn upon the day of the ‘floves.’

## How To Choose Your Team and Team Leader

Before you do anything else: throw in a mild-mannered tech expert.  Anyone who loves light and sound or has a picture of an inanimate object or astronaut as their profile picture with fewer than four likes is a safe bet. Regular updates about arcane texts/intercity transport methods are also telltale signs. They will inevitably work the hardest, the most effectively and with most benefit to the team. Do not let them know you think this. Be sure to cut them a maximum of half a percent in the deal as the ‘techies’ must know their place. Make sure they keep their beaky, spotty noses well out of the way of the men with suave ideas. Call them idiots and tell them that they just “don’t understand banter” and they’ll follow you blindly. If they start thinking that they’re Zuckerberg they’ll take everything, because they are better than you but aren’t brave enough to realise it and definitely not to say it.

If your Dad isn’t involved in finance then you won’t be a team leader. This tenuous link to the world of business is endlessly exploited by loudmouth ‘alpha-males’ with large bank statements and even larger egos. If you don’t start your own business you cannot make “serious amounts of money” or print off fake business cards to get into fashionable London clubs according to these profligate tossers. Widely resented by their teammates aside from a few faux-aristocratic confidantes, the Team Leader’s role is to be a rock of consistency - always vile and repulsive. Prepare for astoundingly delusional conversations predicting the inevitable rise of your fledgling (and god awful) company and vague musings concluding that your product can “really go all the way” while he mentally undresses your business models. Your leader will insist he leads all the presentations due to his natural swagger, confidence and luscious mane of hair, seemingly oblivious to the fact that he more closely resembles a powdered pig in a cosmetics laboratory.

Despite the very nature of the team building being a question of ‘who dresses in the most expensive suit’ (beware the Tweed Jacketed man- for he is your inevitable leader), even those who are initially opposed to this idea succumb to the prospect of making billions and proceed to try to snowball into a team. Therefore, the Team Leader may conduct a series of ‘interviews’ with potential admissions to the team available, wherein he will set a number of places roughly 3x smaller than those wanting in- intensifying the demigod effect that will by now surround this awesome, horn rimmed glasses wearing Messiah of the boardroom.
One will then be asked a series of futile questions only to be told that there are no places left. It may take weeks for this rejected man to see how big a near miss this was.

*Disclaimer: This is a personal opinion from the writers- a large proportion of other students believe YE to be extremely productive, and this article should not deter you from joining the programme.*
