---
title: "The State of Politicians and the Youth Politics Conference"
author: Ramon Menon
---

Filthy, lying, intolerable, odious, moronic cretins sitting on green benches. That’s all that needs to be said, really. Boris earns an inexcusable amount of money but still can’t afford a bottle of Head & Shoulders. Eric Pickles struggles to walk through a front door and another Tory idiot Lord Freud thinks that disabled people aren’t worth it. I’ll tell you what, none of them are worth the £69,000 plus benefits they receive per annum. Jeremy Kyle could do a better job and that is saying something.

On a more serious matter, British politicians have not been making a good account for themselves. The expenses scandal rocked Parliament like the Titanic rocked Newfoundland. The UKIP fox has shaken up Westminster, despite the self-harming mistakes Mr. Farage’s party have managed to make: one candidate said that he would prefer living next door to Germans rather than Romanians and another reckless one said that EU migrants should be deported. The Greens are polling higher than David Cameron’s coffee assistant Nick Clegg even though no one seems to see through their highly irresponsible fiscal policy. If Politics is as much about branding as people claim, I’m surprised there hasn’t been a full scale revolution.
However, there is some better news, Gordon Brown is retiring after the next General Election! He was responsible for making every family in Britain at least £3000 worse off.

Having gone to a youth politics conference on the 1st December, it was clear that politicians were out of touch with young people: you could hear it in their voices, begging us to put our ticks through the ballot box. One of them, Sir Alan Duncan, a Tory MP, said he couldn’t care less if we voted Labour as long as we had shown that we voted. There was Nadine Dorries who was notoriously a part of I’m a Celebrity Get Me Out Of Here who begged us to get involved and talked about her experiences of witnessing poverty in Acton and Everton. Then there was the anxious Simon Hughes, a Lib Dem MP whose sheer desperation in trying to dissuade the young from voting UKIP made him look like a man who was so concerned about his poll ratings now that they are below the Green Party at about 6%. He tried to apologise for failing to limit tuition fees but I don’t think any reasonable person out there could really forgive him nor fail to see through him.

Finally, there was Farage who got an incredibly mixed reaction as he galloped on stage. Looking like a fashion failure, he cracked jokes about Nick Clegg’s uselessness which was followed by sheer laughter. People began to warm towards him until the point when he was asked about tuition fees, when he said that those studying a science or engineering degree would not have to pay a penny in fees. Apparently, this was due to the lack of civil engineers in the country. Surprisingly, a number of people began to warm towards his policy on free trade and immigration.
