---
title: "America, F*ck Yeah"
author: Tyler Jackson
banner: america.jpg
light: light
---

Addressing the problem of whether or not the world needs police is complicated in its own right. The answer is simple, although you may not want to hear it. In certain respects the answer lies in the extremes; whether we want to live in a world with no police, a world where international outlaws are accepted and everyone is forced to ‘get along’.

There are a number of countries where outlaws are dominating, for example in North Korea, currently in Iraq and Syria, whilst there are those who threaten their neighbors with violence, like Iran. In a world without international police, these belligerents harm innocent people and prosper. It was only seventy-odd years ago when a Nazi-backed European movement became so powerful that it threatened to take over the world, with no policeman to stop them from doing so. Tens of millions died – over 80% dying in the ‘victorious’ allied nations, and in a world without policemen, perhaps a repeat could be plausible.

So the question is not whether we need a policeman, but who and how involved should it be? Evidently the U.N. has not been an effective world-policeman. Simply, just by looking at the problems in the world right now – in the Middle East, South America and parts of Europe – we need more than imposing sanctions. The U.N. rarely votes to take effective military action. Furthermore, even when it does vote to take military action, members often refuse to provide the needed military personnel and assets (in defense of their allies) to the point where an exposed U.N. is powerless.

In many respects, the U.S. as world police makes far more sense than the alternatives. China, for all its recent use of capitalism to become more prosperous is still a Communist dictatorship that murdered its own people in Tiananmen Square, and they are simply not trustworthy enough to shoulder the responsibilities of world police.

For one thing, it takes a certain amount of size and prosperity to be the policeman of the world. It is a thankless job, but clearly someone has to do it. That is not to absolve the invasion of Iraq the first time around; that seems a cataclysmic mistake given its consequences (regardless of 9/11). But there is no mistake in the U.S. being policeman of the world, although just how involved should the U.S. be in world affairs?

Without U.S. intervention, Israel would have been obliterated a long-time ago. Empowering the single nation in the Middle East where western values are encouraged seems obvious, yet there remains the debate over whether the U.S. should continue to support and defend all of Israel’s actions. In its current conflict with Gaza, they are losing the war of P.R. significantly. The U.S.’s support is the sole reason that Israel will not fall despite anti-Zionist and anti-Israel demonstrations becoming increasingly more present in Europe.

Generally, nations are scared of the power that the U.S. has – it is becoming so strong in today’s society (financially, socially, technologically, scientifically etc.) that it seems to be an unstoppable superpower. On the one hand, there are people in the U.S. that are homeless, poor, starving, unemployed and dying that need help. Since the resources that the government is giving away to other countries is collected by American citizens, then it should first be used to help any Americans that may need it. Obama’s Foreign Policy states that the government is pushing to maintain U.S. safety and world peace and to maintain a balance of power in the world.  Conversely, when conflicts arise between countries, there is no right and wrong. It is the duty of the government to do what is the best for the country; to prevent and eliminate threats before they reach American ground or people is a great policy, therefore, in certain cases people agree that it is appropriate intervene in a situation in other parts of the world to prevent damage.

Critically, having the United States as police intends to impose western values. It is essential to look at the facts. There are no better suitors for world police, at least none that wouldn’t become corrupt with power. Establishing the need for a world police is vital, and laying down the foundations for a better society allows the U.S. to be a more dominant force in the world. You wouldn’t want a nation such as China to be looking over you, and so, we must understand that America is doing the right thing in its intervention. That is not to say we must be constantly and consistently in support of every action it takes, but it is to say that we must allow the U.S. to be the delegate as police of world affairs.
