---
title: "Dictator Style"
author: James Cole
---

A leopard print cap, a sturdy wooden cane and a pair of thick rimmed glasses could seem like a wardrobe malfunction. How anybody could carry off a style that even the experimental nature of the 70s might deem abhorrent defeats the imagination. And yet nothing else creates a better image of President Mobutu Sese Seko, leader of Zaire for 32 years and one of Africa’s most corrupt dictators.  

For a man with such little fashion sense, one might consider it unfortunate for Mobutu to be accountable for the country’s dress code.  Yet what was there to moderate his outlandish sense of style? Heavily endowed by The West who saw him as a block against communism, and with the remainder of the country’s wealth flooding its way into his bank account, Mobutu could do as he pleased. If it were possible to devise an outfit worse suited to Zaire’s equatorial climate, then he would pick up the prize. The abacost (taken from the French abbreviation of “down with the suit”) was his invention – a long sleeved button up jacket worn with a cravat became the outfit of choice for government officials across the country. They would sweat away in their ridiculous attire in derelict offices which were left in such a state of disrepair that they were deprived of even air conditioning.

Mobutu’s extravagance, however, went far beyond his questionable wardrobe. Whilst the country was experiencing drastic economic decline, Mobutu chose to construct a palace complex that even the Sultan of Brunei would be proud of. Whereas most billionaires would be content to settle for a helipad and a private jet, Mobutu constructed a 3.2 km runway, long enough for Concorde to use. The supersonic passenger jet was hired on numerous occasions, from hospital visits in Switzerland to weekend shopping trips with his wife to Paris – an unnecessary extravagance for a man with little regard for Western fashion you might think. The love of leopard fur wasn’t just limited to Mobutu’s headgear. He loved these animals so much that he built himself a zoo where two could reside in the palace’s sumptuous grounds.

The money for all of this, of course, came from corrupt means. With Mobutu’s reign conveniently coinciding with the height of the Cold War, the White House was willing to give him all the support needed to block out any communist threat. Even when relations turned sour in 1975, over half the U.S’s aid budget for Sub-Saharan Africa ended up in Zaire, $5 billion of which worked its way into Mobutu’s pocket.

Sadly Mobutu’s regime was largely style over substance.With none of the country’s income invested in infrastructure, everything from the military to the health system fell into decline. The country’s operations relied solely on a civil service who pretended to work whilst the government pretended to pay them. Eventually after 32 years in office, Africa’s next generation of young and reformist leaders collaborated under the command of Paul Kagame to depose the continent’s archaic dinosaur leader. With nothing to defend him but a weaponless army who hadn’t received a pay cheque for the past three years, Mobutu was forced to flee, leaving his country in a state of anarchy that remains to this day.

Now that Gaddafi is dead, Morsi is behind bars and Mugabe is fast approaching his dying days in office, it seems that the era of Africa’s dictators may at long last be drawing to a close. Of course there were more corrupt, more loathsome, more disreputable African dictators than Mobutu, but his sheer decadence always brings a smile to my face. Of course true democracy for this nation will take a long time to evolve. Ironically, for a country whose name revolves around the word “Democratic”, the DRC still hasn’t managed to hold a fair election from which the country hasn’t nearly imploded, since. But the African continent is not left without hope. Since 2000 there have been on average 15-20 elections per year, a sign regimes are at least attempting to move in the right direction. Watch this space for more leopard prints and further explosions of bling.
