---
title: Ukraine and Russia
author: J Robine
---

The ground we tread on is suffused with blood- every country, every territory or hectare of sea, has been fought over. Yet there are a few places on earth that are exceptionally bloodthirsty. America, where entire cultures, races hundreds of millions strong, are not only destroyed but forgotten. Israel, which has known no peace these past four thousand years. Yet in my mind nowhere on earth reeks of death the way Slavic Europe does. There, the worst and most notorious genocides, battles and famines, mass slaughters and pillages have been carried out by Jew and German, Russian and Turk, Mongol and Swede, Arab and Italian, Greek and Scythian, for as long as we can tell. The Russian word for ‘safety’, bezopasnost’, literally means ‘without danger’. Every state worth its salt has a purpose and a creed, based on a founding story. The US exists for individualist capitalism, Pakistan exists as an Islamic state, the EU exists as a buffer against extremism. Russia’s raison d’etre lies in the ‘opasnost’; it lives to make sense, goodness and beauty, in the midst of the staggering chaos that is Eastern Europe.

Russia can trace itself back to Rurik, a Varangian (or ‘Viking’) king of the Rus’, a tribe of Scandinavians, which founded Holmgard, settled Ladoga, and took Novgorod in the mid-8th century. We are told that the Chuds, Ves and Krivichi, Slavic tribes, rebelled against the settlers and drove Rurik out, then realised that, with a strong ruler, their stability was unusual and enjoyable; and they called him back. Without this union under a great people, the Slavic and Germanic tribes of Eastern Europe would not have survived the invasions of the Khazar Kaghanate. It is in this fact that the Russian soul finds its first existential truth; the forces of Mongolia, the hellish Tatars, chaos incarnate, can only be repelled by solidarity and obedience to an overlord. Fraternity and filial piety. In the next three hundred year, the Rus’, or Ruthenians, grew to include all manners of great cities and cultures- Ryazan, Smolensk, Polotsk, Tver, and, of course, Kiev- usually through alliances and trade partnerships. The success of the Kievan Rus’ was not only military; missionaries from Byzantium brought it writing (St Cyril brought the Cyrillic alphabet) and Novgorod became a city known across Europe for its trade. Ruthenia was united by its strong military leaders, and its trade ties.

The exact capital of the Rus’ was always uncertain, for different Knyaz (leaders) preferred different lands; however, it was usually one of two cities- Novgorod the Great, and Kiev. In 988, Vladimir the Great, the second Christian Knyaz, declared the Rus’ to be a Christian empire, and built St Vladimir’s Cathedral in Kiev, whilst his son Yaroslav the Wise built the great Saint Sophia based on a cathedral in Constantinople. Here is the second existential truth of the Russian soul- there is no reason to survive the Mongolians, except to defend and love their polar opposite- the beauty of art and writing and mathematics brought by Byzantine missionaries, at its height in Byzantine Orthodoxy. Rurik brought life; St Cyril brought the reason for life. Novgorod is life; Kiev is light.

The darkest hour of Russian history was the rape of Kiev by Batu Khan, the grandson of Genghis. In the next century, Kiev was looted four times, its trade ties with the rest of Russia cut, its cathedrals fell in ruin, and it was deserted by the descendants of Rurik, who lived in Novgorod and Ryazan. Every time the dukes of these cities- forced like Kiev to pay tribute, but still holding a flame of Rurik’s blood and a candle of Byzantine intellect- felt the Golden Horde weakening they sent armies to retie connections with Kiev, most notably under Grand Duke Dmitri. They failed, often fighting amongst each other instead, and Kiev went to the Polish-Lithuanian commonwealth, first as a satellite state- a Voevodsto- and then as a ‘lesser province of the Polish crown’. Finally, a third influence on the Russian soul, the Romanov dynasty, rose from a marriage between Tver and Moscow and put an end to the separation, invading Poland in 1667. Prince Volkonsky, a Rurikid, made the city rebel against the Lithuanian garrisons, which routed immediately. Prussia and Russia were to jointly force Poland to give back all of its possessions in Ukraine in 1793, at the Second Partition.

Under the Romanovs, Ukraine was affectionately known as ‘Malorossiya’, ‘little Russia’, a place where men ‘could not speak without singing’, ‘loving the Tsar more than any Russian’ (according to Von Benigsen). When in 1917 at Brest-Litovsk the German ambassador first made clear that Ukraine was to become an autonomous region subject to German governorship, Trotsky left in disgust- the suggestion was to a Russian as despicable as the idea of an independent Boston or Nanking or Strasbourg or Scotland.

America, by forcing Russia to accept these repugnant borders after 1989, has made itself into an equivalent of the Golden Horde, or like the communist oppressors of the Russian soul and Church. Like Batu Khan and Stalin, America is seen to be obsessed with resources and money- without faith or any sentiments of familial duty. Like Batu Khan, America is based on the fragmentation of Russia- the sponsoring of seditious political parties, the encouragement of rebellious ethnicities. Like Stalin, America is based on hypocrisy. Following the fall of the Berlin wall, the ten years of democracy leading to Putin have been known as Diermokraciya, or the ‘rule of excrement’; people saw the blundering, ultra-corrupt excesses of Yeltsin, and saw America in his parties and his friendliness with oligarchs over traditionalist and communist voices.

Putin is seen as the successor of the Rurikids and of Byzantine orthodox enlightenment, engaging in normalnaya korrupsiya (normal corruption; a concept in Russian politics that one may steal a certain amount from the budget, and the people will never care because they feel that the batyushka of the people can indulge himself) as opposed to Horde pillaging or Yeltsin corruption, encouraging both renewed trade ties and technological advance, building churches and challenging oligarchs.

All this to say; next time you read a Guardian article or see the latest CNN news on Ukraine, do not see a tinpot dictator scrambling for oil; see the culmination of more than a millennium of Russian dreams fighting for survival. Russia feels besieged by the forces of chaos, the egoistical Horde, encroaching on its land and destroying its culture. Look at that Coca-Cola bottle on the table to your right, look at the iPhone from which you’re reading this. Think of who profited from the sale of these items, which culture they belong to, and think of what they’re replacing. Is Putin wrong to worry?
