---
title: 'Did Mother Die Today?'
author: "James Lamming"
---

> “Aujourd’hui, maman est morte,”

-- Albert Camus, L’’Étranger

This first line of Albert Camus’s novel scares me. It scared me first when I sat down at my desk two years ago, a battered copy of the book lying by my elbow, pen and paper ready and waiting to receive my creative translation. I open the book to the first page, and read the first line. I smile. I know what this sentence means. I am ready to commit the classic schoolboy translation to paper. “Mother died today”, I write. An easy start, you might say, and I would find it hard to disagree with you; both the grammar and the vocabulary are simple. I look at my translation, and then at the original. I do this again and again, until I cannot escape the incontrovertible: these two sentences do not mean the same thing.

Any translation must fall into one of three degrees of authenticity depending on its merits. The first degree is most certainly the domain of the GCSE student, nervous that any style or flair he shows in his translation will be penalised for not being literal enough. For him, each word must be seized from the target sentence, looked up in a dictionary, conjugated or declined, and then carelessly replaced. Many are forever stuck in this quagmire of clunky sentence structure, ungainly syntax and never-ending clauses, but there is a great reward for those who can escape from it: the second level of translation. This level excels itself in its modesty, as the key to this translation is to make the audience forget that they are reading a translation of a foreign work, so well have the meaning and themes been conveyed.

Every once in a while though, one comes across a translation so perfect, so melodic that it refuses to be classified simply as a "good job". It is as much a new work as it is a translation, wrapping up all the intricacies and context into flowing speech. For me, the most skilful translations are those that manage to preserve foreign humour; to make an English 21st century reader laugh at a joke at which was first enjoyed in 5th century Athens is no mean feat and, as Virginia Woolf once quipped, "Humour is the first of the gifts to perish in a foreign tongue".

There is, however, one final level of translation, which eludes description; it is as much a new work as it is a translation, wrapping up all the intricacies and context into flowing speech but unlike levels one and two, this level is personal. All translators find one or two works which seem just right (on the subject of hard translations and the phrase "just right", check out the Swedish word lagom) which another translator might find overly unfaithful and clunky: this third level of translation connects to the heart, rather than the mind.

Before I begin this discussion, let me add a much needed nota bene. My original translation is not wrong. Wrong is “Mother died yesterday” or “Granny died today”. Wrong is changing or omitting key factual details, or as Vladimir Nabokov, the distinguished translator and novelist, put it, "wilful reshaping". Rather, my translation is simply a little unfaithful to the original and maybe hinders the planting of some key themes and ideas which are implicit in the French. However, for the sake of avoiding wordiness, I will henceforth define an “error” as “an item which has not done its utmost to express the implied in the original language”.

There are in fact two errors with my original translation - impressive, I know, in a translation which consists of only three words. The first is, in my eyes at least, a grave error. Anyone who has read The Stranger will know that the motif of the book is purely living in the moment, or, as in this first line, today. The original French mimics this, and so in the same way the English should - *today* like *aujourd'hui* must begin the book, confidently setting out Camus' stall.

The second is the more contentious, a subject on which papers, articles and blogs have been written: the translation of *maman*. We have, as I would offer, three options for this word, but before we rush into the risky game of one word translations, . The first is my original translation, *mother*, which gives us *“Today mother died”*. A brusque, harsh sentence, referring to his mother simply by her generic role as parent. For me, this over represents the impersonality implicit in *maman*.  Secondly, we have *mummy/mommy*. I am going to immediately dismiss this out of hand - this is, for me, the furthest of the three from the true meaning of *maman*. It implies far too much affection and love in a book where a key theme is his inability to express what his mother means to him.

I will set out my final proposal: "Today, maman died". Many would bill this as "lazy" or "arrogant" to leave a word untranslated, but hear me out. We have, I hope, agreed that there is no perfect fit for the word maman in the English language, and so surely using a new word, which for an English speaking audience would carry little or no semantic baggage, thought clearly recognisable or at least guessable as the word for mother, is better, or at least no worse, than a word which brings with it unsuitable semantic baggage such as *mother* or *mummy*.

Even as I sit here now dashing off a conclusion to this article, I am not happy with my finished sentence. It is not true to the original and, in my heart of hearts, I know it never will be; *traduttore tradittore*, as they say in Italy.
