---
title: Examining and Exploring the Relationship between Batman and The Joker
author: Rishi Jindal
---

One of the most iconic super villains of all time, The Joker has been around since Batman’s inception and has plagued the Caped Crusader for more than 70 years. There have been numerous interpretations and alterations to his character but his core identity is instantly recognisable.

Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of the relationship between Batman and The Joker is the quasi-paradoxical and infinite nature of it. Neither party can kill each other; Batman cannot kill The Joker on account of his no killing rule, while the Joker does not want to kill Batman for fear of losing the only person capable of playing his perverted games. This is perhaps best expressed by The Clown Prince of Crime himself in Batman #663: "You can't kill me without becoming like me! I can't kill you without losing the only human being who can keep up with me! Isn't it IRONIC?"

Consequently, their conflict and relationship seems to be eternal. Other foes may try and kill Batman while The Joker merely toys with him, plays with him, taunting him to break his only rule. Killing The Joker would break the cycle yet simultaneously hand victory posthumously to The Joker. This game the Joker plays is not completely unrivalled. There is a case to be made for a comparison to the David Fincher film Se7en where the antagonist John Doe brings about the death of one person for each deadly sin. To complete his game, and the full set of sins, the last one, wrath, must take place and John Doe cruelly manipulates another character into shooting him. Although John Doe’s calm, almost robotic exterior is completely at odds with The Joker’s eccentricities, you can feel the same demented nature bubbling under the surface. However, the key difference between the two cases is that Batman doesn’t kill The Joker.

This does not mean that The Joker has never died. Take the recent example of the Arkham City game where, in the final scene, The Joker is poisoned and Batman holds the cure. In the ensuing fight, the vial containing the cure is broken and The Joker dies. In Batman’s last words to him, he explains how he would have saved The Joker even after all the atrocities he had committed. The Joker correctly predicts this earlier in the game and there is a significant amount of evidence which points to his death being part of his plan. He wanted to die leaving Batman subdued, sequestered and even more secluded. He gives Batman the chance to save him but then the vial breaks leaving Batman feeling like he could have saved him. Unexpectedly, Batman then carries The Joker’s body in a respectful yet melancholic manner throughout the city before giving it to the police. This shows us that Batman clearly does have some feeling towards The Joker and some semblance of a relationship, which admittedly is not typical or healthy, definitely exists in some form. We can see that through his actions, but he would never verbally express this. In the New 52 Batman &#35;14 comic he even goes as far as to deny it: “You’re nothing to me.” To which The Joker replies: “Shhh. Don’t do that, don’t pretend, not here, not to me.”

Batman can try and refute their relationship but The Joker, who clearly has a deeper understanding of their enduring relationship, is right; The Joker is not “nothing” to Batman. What is more, Batman evidently means more to The Joker than The Joker means to Batman. This idea is corroborated in The Dark Knight: “I don’t want to kill you, what would I do without you?” “You…complete me”.

Therein lies a huge flaw in the Joker’s psyche. Batman doesn’t need The Joker, yet The Joker needs him. Batman doesn’t want appreciation for what he does for Gotham while The Joker needs acknowledgement and recognition. Nonetheless, this idea of incompleteness has some resonance when you look under the surface of the two characters. At a glance, they are complete opposites, monochromatic colours versus vibrant, often purple shades, introversion contrasting with extroversion, one party “an agent of chaos” and the other “a watchful protector” representing order.

Dig a little deeper, and you find that they actually complement each other. They both have similar origins: in The Killing Joke, the individual that is The Joker is conceived after “one bad day” involving the death of his family and chemical scarring while in the traditional Batman origin story, Bruce Wayne’s “one bad day” involves the death of his parents. The reaction of both characters to these events defines the rest of their lives. Batman becomes a hero, The Joker embraces chaos, madness and the spontaneity of life. They both chose different paths and represent totally contrasting ideologies. The Joker believes that no one is intrinsically good in this world and proves his point by turning Gotham’s “shining white knight” Harvey Dent,  into Two-Face:

> Two-Face: The Joker chose me!

> Batman: Because you were the best of us! He wanted to prove that even someone as good as you could fall.

> Two-Face: [bitterly] And he was right.

While the Joker ultimately bets on man’s inherent nature to be evil, Batman is the opposite; he represents the idea that we are all, to some extent, altruistic or at least benevolent. As a result, they are, to use Two-Face’s classic symbol, two sides of the same coin.
