---
title: "A Lesson in Feminism"
author: "Albert Meek"
---

In my opinion, most articles should start with a quotation from a Beyoncé song. Unfortunately it is quite difficult to fit 'If you like it then you should have put a ring on it' into an article about economic decline in Spain, or the Israel-Palestine conflict. Even more unfortunately for those who don't belong to what is affectionately known as the BeyHive, I was approached by one of the sub editors of this magazine a month ago, who asked me to write an article on gender inequality. This is of course a once in a lifetime opportunity, because as I'm sure at least one of you knows, Beyoncé is a feminist, and so her lyrics have suddenly become very pertinent indeed.

The song that I will now quote to you against your will is called &#42;&#42;&#42;Flawless (the stars are not a typo; they're there for stylistic effect, naturally). The majority of it is a homage to self-worth and independence, however there is a powerful bridge in the second minute which uses audio from a TedX talk by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, a renowned author and political activist. I am sure that you all will have had Ted talks thrust at you at many points during your time at St Paul's, your teachers branding them with fun words like 'insightful' and 'enlightening'. But this one is actually genuinely interesting, funny, and important.  Entitled “We Should All Be Feminists”, it presents gender inequality (in fact inequality as a concept at all) from a perspective that we, as an all-boys independent school, are usually lacking in. One of the most powerful quotes that is used in the song reads 'we say to girls, *you can have ambition, but not too much. You should aim to be successful, but not too successful, otherwise you will threaten the man.*'

It is a fact that we go to a school in which the environment is geared towards men. There are few female teachers, there are no female heads of year, and our sister school might as well be non-existent, considering the majority of us only come into contact with it once a year. It is also a fact that when we leave full time education and go off to become brilliant, successful and productive members of society, the jobs we enter are also terrifyingly male-dominant. Almost half of major corporations worldwide have no women on their boards. In 1998, a year in which a lot of us had already been born, women made up 0.079 percent of managerial positions in the Fortune 500. This disadvantage, which is something that we as men will never truly feel, is a phenomenon caused almost exclusively by the attitudes that men have towards their female colleagues. Women are blocked for promotion, not hired, and passed over due to conscious and subconscious ideas about the sexes that are still present in society today. Adichie attributes this to the fact that a thousand years ago, leadership was defined by physical strength. However, she also says the following:

“Today we live in a vastly different world. The person more likely to lead is not the physically stronger person, it is the more creative person, the more intelligent person, the more innovative person, and there are no hormones for those attributes. A man is as likely as a woman to be intelligent, to be creative, to be innovative. We have evolved, but it seems to me that our ideas of gender have not”.

This idea that an innate sexism is embedded in our brains (meaning that the majority of men view women as subordinate), is false, in my opinion. I believe that it stems from a cycle of disadvantage: young men look at leadership roles around the world, and see that they are filled with other men. This perpetuates the belief that a woman is not fit to lead, to become a CEO or a politician. And so the young men, who will ascend to these positions because the men already there will favour their applications ahead of female candidates, are conditioned from an early age to think that two people, no matter how similar their qualifications or level of experience, can be different because of their sex.

This situation has undeniably improved in the last century, or even in the last few decades. However, as the future executives, politicians, CEOs, and owners of many other influential and reunion-dominating job titles, I think it is important that the people at this school leave here with the utmost respect for women. And by that I do not mean being nice to your mother, or paying for a meal at the Bluebird. I mean the ability to see women as your equals, and your superiors, because if the future is halfway decent, those are the positions they will occupy.
