---
title: Film Review: Interstellar
author: Albert Meek
---

Every year, there are a few films that force you to leave the cinema with an open mouth, whispering 'Whoa...' to yourself, and to the person you dragged along with you at short notice with promises of free popcorn and complex plot twists. Interstellar, in my opinion, is one of these films. (Please be warned that I will try to keep any spoilers minimal and vague, but they may still crop up.)

As the latest big budget sci-fi film from Hollywood, Interstellar, although outstanding in its own right, has a considerable weight on its shoulders as it fights against the formidable reputations of Gravity (2013) and 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968). All three have a common location (space) and thus it's almost impossible to mention one without comparing it to the other two. Gravity, being at least the runner up in the 'space film' competition, is an epic feat of visual effects that depicts Sandra Bullock flailing from one international spacecraft to the next, suffering through seemingly every possible mechanical failure and fluke of bad luck known to man. Dramatic plot twist after dramatic plot twist occurs to the tune of Steven Price's instrumental, nausea-inducing soundtrack, as well as periods of deafening silence (because as we all know, space is a vacuum). Interstellar also has an excellent score, written by the legendary Hans Zimmer, which lends the film a similar level of gravitas (getting the pun out of the way early), and provides a grounding contrast to the noiseless world of astrological exploration.

The film itself, it must be said, has a few flaws. The basis of the plot being mankind's instinct to survive, it follows the journey of Anne Hathaway and Matthew McConaughey (the recently ordained megastar after his leading role in Dallas Buyer's Club) as they leave loved ones behind (with slim chance of return) in order to explore a number of 'Goldilocks Zone' planets. Those forced to wait back on earth (McConaughey's two children, and Hathaway's ageing father) are able to send heartfelt messages to the astronauts, who pass through a wormhole somewhere in the vicinity of Saturn, but are unable to receive any form of communication in return. This, combined with complicated mixes of relativity, cryogenics, black holes and other things that only the A-level physicists among you will understand, means that time seems to fluctuate throughout the story, making it difficult to keep track of paradoxical loops and who's older than who. Hours on one planet are years on another, and people live out massive chunks of their lives back on earth whilst the voyagers are frozen in suspended animation. This is a problem dealt with cleverly by director Christopher Nolan (whose past creations include Batman Begins, The Dark Knight and of course, The Dark Knight Rises). He condenses the emotional trauma of childhood abandonment back on earth into a heart-breaking minute of video messages, which perpetually-forty-five-year-old McConaughey tearfully witnesses with undeniably brilliant acting.

However, Anne Hathaway's character, Brand, is annoyingly stereotyped (her being the only women in the exploration team) as emotional, reckless, and subject to a frankly ridiculous bout of "sentimentality" when faced with a fate-of-humanity-changing decision. The fact that she isn't great at acting also does not help. This, along with the annoying lack of emotional competence or rational thought processes that any of the characters seem to engage when faced with the death of loved ones or epic failures of opportunity, means that parts of the film are a stretch to believe. This is a similar problem in 2001: A Space Odyssey, the end of which features the main character seemingly ascending to some sort of God-like state, in my opinion ruining a masterpiece of directing and story arcs. But I digress.

Interstellar is a brilliant film. In fact I highly recommend seeing it whilst it’s still in cinemas. It definitely ranks alongside 2001: ASO in terms of visuals, plot twists and thrilling-ness. But in the process of trying to mix in moral lessons and emotional depth, which Gravity did indeed accomplish, it becomes diluted from what it (as a Christopher Nolan movie) should have been: a film based on action, despair and violence, with a big budget and bigger explosions, but also one that harks back to the profound simplicity of the 1960s, when the spacecraft floating across screen for a really quite unnecessary amount of time were humble models, hand-made from balsa wood.
