---
title: "The Ryder Cup and Why You Should Care"
author: Daniel Taktak
banner: ryder-cup.jpg
---

‘And a half.’ If you hear this expression around the atrium then you know that one of two things is being discussed, either: scrambling to finish Maths prep before the bell or discussing the emphatic nature of Europe’s Ryder Cup victory by 16.5 points to 11.5. However, here lies an issue. The issue is that too many times people were discussing the former, not the latter. It seems that too few tutor groups began their Monday morning by discussing the heroics of Jamie Donaldson and instead focused on more common issues such as prep left over from the weekend.

Now the question remains: why wasn’t everyone discussing the nature of the historic win that had just taken place? Why weren’t more people searching out the Americans in their year and dishing out the customary abuse that comes with supporting the losing side?

One thing is for sure, it isn’t due to a lack of quality. This Ryder Cup saw a number of outstanding shots and individual performances, whether it be the magnificence of Martin Kaymer’s chip in to beat Bubba Watson on the 15th, or that Justin Rose’s and Henrik Stenson’s dazzling performance in the Saturday fourballs session, one thing that this Ryder Cup did not lack is talent. If you’re looking for controversy, look no further than Phil Mickelson’s comments towards his captain Tom Watson’s poor decision making. So then, why was the whole school not buzzing about the Ryder Cup?

The atmosphere around the Gleneagles course in Scotland could not be faulted. Fans oohed, aahed, politely applauded and yelled ‘Get in the hole!’ at every exquisite shot that the world’s greatest players had to offer. There were 40,000 fans lined up down the first hole just to see the first singles match get underway on the Sunday. Some of these fans arose at 2 o’clock in the morning just to get the ideal spot in the grandstand. There was evidence of the raw passion amongst the fans gathered in Perth which fans around the rest of the country just seem to slightly lack. But why?

Despite the fact that many of us may pop onto our local golf range and smack a few drives, people just lack the love of the game that is dedicated to sports such as football. However, there is just as competitive an atmosphere on a golf course as there is at Stamford Bridge. Players are made to fight hard, hold their nerve and even shed a tear once in a while as well as making just as much as footballers do, and yet we are nowhere near as dedicated to our continent’s golf team as we are to our football teams. I once heard that watching the Ryder Cup on the television was like ‘watching those last minutes of a Champions League final over an entire day’ and what’s not to love about that? One promise that I can make to you is that it’s not just about watching 5 hours of fat men hitting a ball with a stick on grass. Alright, well maybe it is to an extent… but it’s high quality stuff! There is just as much drama and far more pressure on a golfer holding a 1UP lead than there is on a team leading by one goal. This is due to the fact that an individual football player misplacing a pass has far less impact than a golfer who just misses a putt by an inch.

Granted, the Ryder Cup this year did lack just a few things; most notably a certain Tiger Woods who brings with him not just his adoring fans and controversy but the element of ‘What did Tiger do?’ to the competition. His absence through injury was one that the Americans did clearly miss and his experience would no doubt have left the players a more relatable character to talk to and receive wisdom from than captain Watson. Yes, looking back on Ryder Cups of yesteryear we can say that this one did lack some drama. Compared to the nail-biting finish of the Miracle at Medinah two years ago this tournament did lack the beautifully Hollywood scripted comeback story. But that meant it also lacked the poor performance from a complacent nation throwing a lead away and that was certainly not missed. Indeed we also had some incredibly tight singles matches turned around and incredibly won by the likes of Graeme McDowell. Just because Europe were the favourites doesn’t mean we should call their win easy, but possibly instead we should praise the excellent captaincy of Paul McGinley.

I’m afraid to say that if you did miss the Ryder Cup, you have missed out and it will be a two-year wait until you can experience the drama once again. However, fear not - there is plenty of golf to watch in between including the Masters and the Open. So I implore you to get down to your local course, celebrate every putt as if you were Ian Poulter, challenge an American to a game and humiliate him just like the guys on the telly, and in two years time strap yourself in for one of the most exciting spectacles the world of sport has to offer.
