---
title: "10 Tips to Boost England's Chances At Euro 2016"
author: Fintan Owens
---

1.
--

Send the younger members of the squad to participate in U21 or even U19 tournaments; as a result of this there will be greater cohesion and team chemistry. For example, the system in Germany is often lauded, with the most commonly cited example the 2009 European Championship squad, featuring 6 members who would go on to be the World-Cup winning squad of 2014. However, for England the total is only two. Moreover, fans enjoy seeing young talent develop, as it helps to delude them that the future will be better than the present (which is highly unlikely for England). The failure to “sign” Adnan Januzaj (whose name I spent about five minutes trying to spell) indicates that England is no longer seen as an attractive team to play for by up and coming youngsters.

2.
--

Don’t pick solely from the Top Four. Select talent from the full range of the Premier League table and perhaps even the Championship. Shelvey, Vardy, Zaha and Berahino are all players who the Three Lions supporters would like to see play more in the current England set-up.  

3.
--

The FA should appoint a more charismatic manager, one who inspires his players to play for him: Harry Redknapp, Tony Pulis or, perhaps, Stuart Pearce, the current manager of the U21 side. Someone who does not tell stories about monkeys going to space and or who is made to seem like a relic from a bygone era. I, for one, do not see the problem with a foreign manager. If they (in this I include women as well) are good enough, then they should have an equal opportunity in becoming England manager. This is necessary as players who perform excellently week in week out, such as Leighton Baines, are not being motivated fully by Roy Hodgson.

4.
--

England should try to appeal to the general public, so that people actually want to watch the national team play. For instance, in a recent friendly against Norway at Wembley, the attendance was a paltry 40,181, meaning that Sunderland’s 2013-2014 home game average attendance was higher. The unglamorous remaining European Championship qualifying fixtures mean that England needs a greater social media presence in order to connect with the disillusioned young England supporters.

5.
--

Similarly, make fans value their country at least as much as their club. On October 4th, results of a poll on the issue of “club versus country” were released, detailing that 69% of the participants had voted for club, meaning that only 31% voted that country was more important. Consecutive poor showings at the World Cup and a realisation that England will probably never be able to challenge for major trophies for a long while at least has prompted this. In response, England should stop treating their fans as consumers, but as people who want to watch their team. The price of the new England shirt at £90 is extortionate compared to a shirt of the Premier League champions Manchester City, which costs around £50. This prevents poorer fans from feeling a part of England’s target supporter base.

6.
--

England’s arrogance in not playing to other team’s weaknesses is also a problem which needs to be addressed. For example, the fact that Park Ji-Sung, a relatively experienced (he was 29 years old at the time), but pacy individual man-marked Andrea Pirlo and shut him out the game should have lead England to pick someone similar. Instead they picked Sterling, who had never played against Pirlo, in the hope that his pace would cut Pirlo out. Although Sterling did not play poorly, it would have been more tactically astute to place Wayne Rooney, who is Manchester United’s fastest starter and the seventh fastest player in the world according to FIFA and who had much more experience playing against Pirlo than Sterling, against the Italian veteran.

7.
--

Joe Hart needs to be tested more for his place as England No.1 keeper to make sure that he does not become overly-confident in his own abilities, as happened to Iker Casillas, both in Spain and Real-Madrid jerseys. Fraser Forster should be utilised more, especially as he now plays regularly in the Premier League, with a Southampton team that is now second in the self-proclaimed “best league in the world”. After all, it is no mean feat to be nicknamed “The Great Wall” by Mundo Deportivo, a Catalan sports newspaper. Given that the award for the best goalkeeper in the La Liga is named after a former Barcelona player, the newspaper based in Barcelona clearly wasn’t exaggerating when it christened Forster with such a  glorious epithet.

8.
--

The FA should prove to all that it is not “institutionally racist”, as Sol Campbell said it was in his biography.This should be done by appointing ethnic minorities to important positions within the England football team. As Campbell claimed there was not one “one black coach, one black physio ... masseur ... no-one”. The FA should start a campaign to appoint more ethnic minorities in the top tiers of England’s backroom staff and to encourage more non-white managers to start managing in English football leagues.

9.
--

England should be slated less by the media. For example, every match against a worse team which is won by a goal margin of less than 2 goals is subject to intense scrutiny, with every player coming under the microscope from every daily newspaper in the land. Furthermore, the national team was never in a position to get out the group stage, but was roundly criticised when they failed to win against teams with vastly more experience than them and a larger trophy cabinet.

10.
--

Finally, England have players with class, so why not let them use it? Players should be able to play with some degree of individuality without being worried that they will fail. As Zlatan said to Pep Guardiola, “You bought a Ferrari, but you drive it like a Fiat”, criticising Barcelona’s possession obsessed football. Therefore, England should, above all, #DareToZlatan in preparation for the European Championships in France 2016. 
