---
title: "10 Tips to Boost England's Chances At Euro 2016"
author: Fintan Owens
---

1.
--

Send the younger members of the squad to participate in U21 or even U19 tournaments. In this way there can be cohesion and greater team chemistry. For example, the system in Germany has often been lauded, with the most commonly cited example the 2009 European Championship team featuring 6 members who would go on to be the World-Cup winning squad of 2014. However, for England the total is only 2. Moreover, fans enjoy seeing developing young talent, as it deludes them that the future will be better than the present, which is highly unlikely for England. The failure to “sign” Adnan Januzaj (whose name I spent about five minutes trying to spell) indicates that England is no longer seen as an attractive team to play for, for an up and coming youngster.

2.
--

Don’t pick from solely the Top Four and, increasingly, Everton. Select from talent from the extent of the Premier League table and perhaps even the Championship. Shelvey, Vardy, Zaha and Berahino are all players who I would like to be used more in the current England set-up.  

3.
--

England should appoint a more charismatic manager, one who inspires his players to play for him. A Harry Redknapp, Tony Pulis or, perhaps, Stuart Pearce, current manager of the U21 side. Someone who does not tell stories about monkeys going to space and is made to seem like a racist from a bygone era. I, for one, do not see the problem with a foreign manager. If they (in this I include women as well) are good enough, then they should have an equal opportunity in becoming the England manager. This is necessary as players who used to perform excellently week in week out, such as Leighton Baines, are not being motivated in the same way by Roy Hodgson.

4.
--

England should try to appeal to the general public, so that people will want to watch the national team play. For instance, in a recent friendly against Norway, the attendance was a paltry 40,181, meaning that Sunderland’s 2013-2014 home game average attendance was higher. In that season, Sunderland were poor for most of the campaign and were bottom of the Premier League table at Christmas. The unglamorous remaining European Championship qualifying fixtures means that England need a greater social media presence in order to connect with the disillusioned young England supporters.

5.
--

Similarly, make fans value country at least as much as their club. On October 4th, results of a poll on the issue of “club versus country” were released, detailing that 69% of the participants had voted for club, meaning that only 31% (as the Pauline reading the article will have figured out) voted that country was more important. Consecutive poor showings at the World Cup and a realisation that England will probably never challenge for major trophies for a while has prompted this. In response, England should stop treating their fans as consumers, but as people who want to watch their team. The prices of the new England shirt at £90 were extortionate, compared to a Manchester City, the Premier League champions, shirt for around £50, preventing poorer fans from feeling a part of England’s target supporter base.

6.
--

England’s arrogance in not playing to other team’s weaknesses is also a problem which needs to be addressed. For example, the fact that Park Ji-Sung, a relatively experienced (he was 29 years old at the time), but pacy individual man-marked Andrea Pirlo and shut him out the game should have lead England to pick someone similar. Instead they picked Sterling, who had never played against Pirlo, in the hope that his pace would cut Pirlo out. Although Sterling did not play poorly, it would have been more tactically astute to place Wayne Rooney, who is Manchester United’s fastest starter and the seventh fastest player in the world, according to FIFA and had much more experience against Pirlo than Sterling, against the Italian veteran.

7.
--

Joe Hart needs to be tested more for his place as England No.1 keeper to make sure that he does not become overly-confident in his own abilities, as happened to Iker Casillas, both in the Spain and Real-Madrid jerseys. Fraser Forster should be utilised more, especially as he now plays regularly in the Premier League, with a Southampton team which are now second in the self-proclaimed “best league in the world”. After all, it is no mean feat to be nicknamed “The Great Wall” by Mundo Deportivo, a Catalan sports newspaper. Given that the award for the best goalkeeper in the La Liga is named after a former Barcelona player, the newspaper based in Barcelona clearly weren’t exaggerating when he christened Forster with that glorious epithet.

8.
--

The FA should prove to all that is not “institutionally racist”, as Sol Campbell said in his biography, by appointing ethnic minorities to important positions within the England football team. As Campbell claimed there was not one “one black coach, one black physio ... masseur ... no-one”, the FA should start campaigns to appoint more ethnic minorities in the top tiers of England’s backroom staff and to encourage more non-white managers to start managing in the English football leagues.

9.
--

England should be slated less by the media. For example, every match against a worse team which is won by a goal margin of less than 2 goals is subject to intense scrutiny, with every player coming under the microscope of every daily newspaper in the land. Furthermore, the national team were never in a position to challenge to get out the group stage, but were roundly criticised when they failed to win against teams with vastly more experience than them and a larger trophy cabinet, with six World Cups, one European Championship and a stunning 15 Copa Americas, for both teams combined, compared to England’s solitary World Cup.

10.
--

Finally, England have players with a  certain amount of class, so why are they not allowed to use it? Players should be able to play with some degree of individuality, without being worried that they will fail. As Zlatan said to Pep Guardiola, ““You bought a Ferrari, but you drive it like a Fiat”, criticising Barcelona’s possession obsessed football. Therefore, England should, above all, #DaretoZlatan in preparation for the European Championships in France 2016. 
