---
title: Why the MLS is the future of Football
author: Tyler Jackson
---

‘Soccer’ has come a long way in America since the birth of MLS In 1993, seen primarily as the dumping ground for old professionals trying to make a quick buck before they retire.  Today, in 2014, the American competition can now at least lay some claim to being a competitive professional league: former World greats Frank Lampard, David Villa and Kaka – now all well into their thirties – have signed up for deals with MLS franchises, and, if Lampard’s four goals in 3 games for City is anything to tell by, these players are most certainly not “past it.”

Despite all this, it seems that it is rather paradoxically the Americans who are leading the way in at least one aspect of the game: technology.

Whilst the English game wrestles with its own technological conundrum (goal-line technology was only recently introduced following events that shunted the issue to the forefront of minds once more) the American’s football has taken a two-footed leap into the future.

Adidas, sponsors of the MLS and pioneers of technology, claim MLS managers will be able to access real-time information through a tablet computer in the dugout, via a chip planted into player’s shirts. This they claim to be the “next step in player performance analysis” – coaches will be able to access data such as heart rate, player position, power output, speed, distance covered, intensity of play, acceleration and GPS heat mapping, just by using tablet devices on the bench. This real-time technology is unheard of, and whilst managers such as Roberto Martinez will retire to his home after a match day, and relax with an in-depth, post-game analysis from ProZone, MLS managers will have a serious advantage as they have this vast wealth of information at their fingertips.

So what are the implications of this new technology? The crux of Adidas’ idea comes from the real-time aspect of the data; managers could conceivably base their team-talk at halftime on the information that has been received from the computer chip. This Orwellian aspect of the technology suggests that the manager may only need to press a few buttons or listen to the warning of the system to make all of his tactical decisions… if only there was a popular computer game about being a football manager that they could use to prepare for this technological leap. It seems as if this advance in technology is leading the way to managers sitting in the crowds, controlling their players as if in FIFA!

Adidas claims that the program will provide alerts for when players are growing fatigued or if their work-rate simply isn’t up to scratch, essentially helping managers to make decisions as to what to do next. Before too long, the sight of a manager stood on the touchlines with an iPad in hand staring at the screen in order to judge the performance on the pitch rather than viewing what is in front of him could be common place. Instinct, tactical nous and experience could all pale in significance as the plethora of data suggests what to do next.

Of course this is not the first time the MLS has led the way in football innovation. The newly inducted, fan-favourite, vanishing free-kick spray was first introduced by the MLS in 2011, three years before it came into public view at the Brazil 2014 World Cup.  This is just one example of why so many high-profile stars are signing up to be with the undeniable ‘entrepreneurs of football’.

Moreover, in recent years technology has played an increasingly vital role in how football is understood.  Football is in no way immune to the effects of the digital age. However, football has always stubbornly kept one foot in the past, or at least its governing bodies have, thus it has proved difficult to drag the game into the future. Technology is surely football's greatest friend, and can be used to enhance it, not change it fundamentally in any way. Goal-line technology and vanishing spray are the most recent inductees into the “Premier League Technology Hall of Fame”, perhaps soon to be followed by video replays. All of these have been seen recently in the MLS.

Football fans want technology because its implementation would make the game more fair. Supporters call for the game to be less like a lottery; we are excited by raw talent as opposed to luck. As a football fan, I have witnessed and felt wronged by decisions involving my team. Injustice is wrong, at any level; the fact that every team is on the end of a poor refereeing decision shouldn’t be negated because it ‘balances out.’ A disallowed goal, for example, could be worth millions to the club that has been affected. They could be relegated, miss out on the prospect of promotion, maybe even lose a final, or a last-16 knockout round World Cup game to Germany for that matter, not that it scars you for life or anything.

The introduction of Hawk-Eye into the Premier League is evidence of the FA’s growing approval of MLS technology. Although it has not been fully adopted by UEFA, for example both European trophies still use goal line referees (fifth officials), the future looks bright for technology. Goal line technology already drastically improved the Premier League last season, paving the way for other leagues, such as La Liga in Spain and Ligue 1 in France, to sign on for such technology. The FA changed their mind due to the outrage at the abhorrent decision in South Africa in 2010 and has not looked back, again, not that that event was in any way scarring.

In many ways, the MLS does have something to learn as well from European football. Perhaps it would be more popular if it weren’t for the salary cap or maximum of designated players. However, for the game to keep pace with the modern world that surrounds it, perhaps it wouldn’t be such a bad example to embrace MLS soccer. Maybe, there is something to learn from the Americans and the MLS after all.
