---
title: "The Death of Test Cricket?"
author: Douglas Law
banner: cricket.jpg
light: light
---

Test cricket is tied down, waiting on the tracks for the train of limited overs cricket to arrive and integrate it into its crowd-pleasing, money-spinning anatomy. Michael Vaughan, a man whose cover drive was the visualisation of sophistication, seeming to embody the grace of a dove and the ferocity of an angry hippo, has written that players today lack incentive to become test cricketers. It is hard to argue that he does not have a point; by playing in the IPL, players from countries across the globe can make hundreds of thousands of pounds in the time it takes you or I, or indeed other cricketers, to get through to BT customer service. This remarkable gulf in monetary reward gives rise to a line of enquiry: Why would any highly skilled professional cricketer train for years to play a game lasting over five days when they could make five times as much money in two months? This simple question, curiously, has a complex answer.
The solution seems to lie in the history of the game of cricket. Test cricket history and the nature of competitions like the Ashes mean that most players want to play test cricket, whether they are capable of doing so is another matter.

This creates an issue, embodied in the recent Ashes series. A ticket to the final day’s play at any ground would have led you to witness not a single over of cricket; the players were consistently playing test cricket as it had rarely been seen before. After seven days of cricket were lost the series was termed a ‘financial disaster’ by The Week but for many of those who follow the game the loss of revenue was of little importance; instead, the series’ frenetic pace was a symptom, another crack in the surface of the already fragile soufflé of test cricket.
Players like Shaun Tait and Lasith Malinga, bowlers whose approach to the crease has been likened to the charge of a large rhinoceros, have actually turned their back on the test format. The strain test matches put on their bodies over five days can damage them to the extent that their limited overs careers, where they make most of their income, are put in jeopardy.  The loss of these players, and others, is a source of concern for test cricket but is indicative of a wider problem; some players no longer prioritise test cricket in the manner that they have in the past. This issue looms over test cricket, similar to how a large man wearing a vest and carrying a baseball bat would probably loom over a small child as made his way down the quiet towpath.

It seems clear that test cricket cannot survive as it has previously; the relatively new limited overs contests that have been tossed into the mix in recent years are shaking things up to some degree and crucially, test cricket is no longer the main focus for players and supporters. One question remains: how do the cricket boards intend to deal with this issue? The introduction of day/night games has already been suggested, but the effects of this will be limited. Only time will tell as to how well test matches will deal with the other forms of the game. In the short term, however, I propose a training course, intensive in every sense. Using the principles of fear and pain, recruits will be turned into the greatest test players the world has ever seen. Twelve-hour net sessions, with severe punishments for those who fail to protect their wicket, will guarantee batsmen have the surest defence ever created. Bowlers, of course, will not be free from the toil. They will bowl, without rest, at the aforementioned batsmen, developing never-before seen techniques, delivered with unrivalled skill. But what about the wicketkeepers, you may be asking? Well, perhaps that is better left unsaid.
